                           EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                           HEALTH AND CONSUMERS DIRECTORATE-GENERAL

                           Health Systems and Products
                           Medicinal Products - Quality, safety and efficacy

                                                              Brussels,
                                                              SANCO/AM/sl/ddg1.d.6(2012)860362




                                                    EudraLex

               The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union

                                                    Volume 4
                                               EU Guidelines for
                                    Good Manufacturing Practice for
                        Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use

                                             Chapter 1
                                     Pharmaceutical Quality System



    Legal basis for publishing the detailed guidelines: Article 47 of Directive
    2001/83/EC on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use and
    Article 51 of Directive 2001/82/EC on the Community code relating to veterinary
    medicinal products. This document provides guidance for the interpretation of the
    principles and guidelines of good manufacturing practice (GMP) for medicinal
    products as laid down in Directive 2003/94/EC for medicinal products for human use
    and Directive 91/412/EEC for veterinary use.

    Status of the document: revision 3

    Reasons for changes: Amendments to the text of Chapter 1 have been made in order
    to align with the concepts and terminology described in the ICH Q10 tripartite
    guideline on Pharmaceutical Quality System. The title of the chapter itself is also
    changed accordingly.

    Deadline for coming into operation: 31 January 2013




Commission Européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel – Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11



                                                          1
Principle

The holder of a Manufacturing Authorisation must manufacture medicinal products so
as to ensure that they are fit for their intended use, comply with the requirements of
the Marketing Authorisation or Clinical Trial Authorisation, as appropriate and do not
place patients at risk due to inadequate safety, quality or efficacy. The attainment of
this quality objective is the responsibility of senior management and requires the
participation and commitment by staff in many different departments and at all levels
within the company, by the company’s suppliers and by its distributors. To achieve
this quality objective reliably there must be a comprehensively designed and correctly
implemented Pharmaceutical Quality System1 incorporating Good Manufacturing
Practice and Quality Risk Management. It should be fully documented and its
effectiveness monitored. All parts of the Pharmaceutical Quality System should be
adequately resourced with competent personnel, and suitable and sufficient premises,
equipment and facilities. There are additional legal responsibilities for the holder of
the Manufacturing Authorisation and for the Qualified Person(s).

The basic concepts of Quality Management, Good Manufacturing Practice and
Quality Risk Management are inter-related. They are described here in order to
emphasise their relationships and their fundamental importance to the production and
control of medicinal products.


Pharmaceutical Quality System1

1.1 Quality Management is a wide-ranging concept, which covers all matters, which
individually or collectively influence the quality of a product. It is the sum total of the
organised arrangements made with the objective of ensuring that medicinal products
are of the quality required for their intended use. Quality Management therefore
incorporates Good Manufacturing Practice.

1.2 GMP applies to the lifecycle stages from the manufacture of investigational
medicinal products, technology transfer, commercial manufacturing through to
product discontinuation. However the Pharmaceutical Quality System can extend to
the pharmaceutical development lifecycle stage as described in ICH Q10, which while
optional, should facilitate innovation and continual improvement and strengthen the
link between pharmaceutical development and manufacturing activities. ICH Q10 is
reproduced in Part III of the Guide and can be used to supplement the contents of this
chapter.

1.3 The size and complexity of the company’s activities should be taken into
consideration when developing a new Pharmaceutical Quality System or modifying
an existing one. The design of the system should incorporate appropriate risk
management principles including the use of appropriate tools. While some aspects of
the system can be company-wide and others site-specific, the effectiveness of the
system is normally demonstrated at the site level.


1
  Art 6 of Directives 2003/94/EC and 91/412/EEC require manufacturers to establish and implement an effective pharmaceutical
quality assurance system. The term Pharmaceutical Quality System is used in this chapter in the interests of consistency with
ICH Q10 terminology. For the purposes of this chapter these terms can be considered interchangeable.



                                                              2
1.4 A Pharmaceutical Quality System appropriate for the manufacture of medicinal
products should ensure that:

      (i) Product realisation is achieved by designing, planning, implementing,
      maintaining and continuously improving a system that allows the consistent
      delivery of products with appropriate quality attributes;

      (ii) Product and process knowledge is managed throughout all lifecycle stages;

      (iii) Medicinal products are designed and developed in a way that takes
      account of the requirements of Good Manufacturing Practice;

      (iv) Production and control operations are clearly specified and Good
      Manufacturing Practice adopted;

      (v) Managerial responsibilities are clearly specified;

      (vi) Arrangements are made for the manufacture, supply and use of the correct
      starting and packaging materials, the selection and monitoring of suppliers and
      for verifying that each delivery is from the approved supply chain;

      (vii) Processes are in place to assure the management of outsourced activities.

      (viii) A state of control is established and maintained by developing and using
      effective monitoring and control systems for process performance and product
      quality.

      (ix) The results of product and processes monitoring are taken into account in
      batch release, in the investigation of deviations, and, with a view to taking
      preventive action to avoid potential deviations occurring in the future.

      (x) All necessary controls on intermediate products, and any other in-process
      controls and validations are carried out;

      (xi) Continual improvement is facilitated through the implementation of
      quality improvements appropriate to the current level of process and product
      knowledge.

      (xii) Arrangements are in place for the prospective evaluation of planned
      changes and their approval prior to implementation taking into account
      regulatory notification and approval where required;

      (xiii) After implementation of any change, an evaluation is undertaken to
      confirm the quality objectives were achieved and that there was no unintended
      deleterious impact on product quality;

      (xiv) An appropriate level of root cause analysis should be applied during the
      investigation of deviations, suspected product defects and other problems.
      This can be determined using Quality Risk Management principles. In cases


                                          3
       where the true root cause(s) of the issue cannot be determined, consideration
       should be given to identifying the most likely root cause(s) and to addressing
       those. Where human error is suspected or identified as the cause, this should
       be justified having taken care to ensure that process, procedural or system-
       based errors or problems have not been overlooked, if present. Appropriate
       corrective actions and/or preventative actions (CAPAs) should be identified
       and taken in response to investigations. The effectiveness of such actions
       should be monitored and assessed, in line with Quality Risk Management
       principles.

       (xv) Medicinal products are not sold or supplied before a Qualified Person has
       certified that each production batch has been produced and controlled in
       accordance with the requirements of the Marketing Authorisation and any
       other regulations relevant to the production, control and release of medicinal
       products;

       (xvi) Satisfactory arrangements exist to ensure, as far as possible, that the
       medicinal products are stored, distributed and subsequently handled so that
       quality is maintained throughout their shelf life;

       (xvii) There is a process for self-inspection and/or quality audit, which
       regularly appraises the effectiveness and applicability of the Pharmaceutical
       Quality System.

1.5 Senior management has the ultimate responsibility to ensure an effective
Pharmaceutical Quality System is in place, adequately resourced and that roles,
responsibilities, and authorities are defined, communicated and implemented
throughout the organisation. Senior management’s leadership and active participation
in the Pharmaceutical Quality System is essential. This leadership should ensure the
support and commitment of staff at all levels and sites within the organisation to the
Pharmaceutical Quality System.

1.6 There should be periodic management review, with the involvement of senior
management, of the operation of the Pharmaceutical Quality System to identify
opportunities for continual improvement of products, processes and the system itself.

1.7 The Pharmaceutical Quality System should be defined and documented. A
Quality Manual or equivalent documentation should be established and should contain
a description of the quality management system including management
responsibilities.

Good Manufacturing Practice for Medicinal Products

1.8 Good Manufacturing Practice is that part of Quality Management which ensures
that products are consistently produced and controlled to the quality standards
appropriate to their intended use and as required by the Marketing Authorisation,
Clinical Trial Authorisation or product specification. Good Manufacturing Practice is
concerned with both production and quality control. The basic requirements of GMP
are that:



                                          4
       (i) All manufacturing processes are clearly defined, systematically reviewed in
       the light of experience and shown to be capable of consistently manufacturing
       medicinal products of the required quality and complying with their
       specifications;

       (ii) Critical steps of manufacturing processes and significant changes to the
       process are validated;

       (iii) All necessary facilities for GMP are provided including:
                • Appropriately qualified and trained personnel;
                • Adequate premises and space;
                • Suitable equipment and services;
                • Correct materials, containers and labels;
                • Approved procedures and instructions, in accordance with the
                Pharmaceutical Quality System;
                • Suitable storage and transport;

       (iv) Instructions and procedures are written in an instructional form in clear
       and unambiguous language, specifically applicable to the facilities provided;

       (v) Procedures are carried out correctly and operators are trained to do so;

       (vi) Records are made, manually and/or by recording instruments, during
       manufacture which demonstrate that all the steps required by the defined
       procedures and instructions were in fact taken and that the quantity and quality
       of the product was as expected.

       (vii) Any significant deviations are fully recorded, investigated with the
       objective of determining the root cause and appropriate corrective and
       preventive action implemented;

       (viii) Records of manufacture including distribution which enable the
       complete history of a batch to be traced are retained in a comprehensible and
       accessible form;

       (ix) The distribution of the products minimises any risk to their quality and
       takes account of Good Distribution Practice;

       (x) A system is available to recall any batch of product, from sale or supply;

       (xi) Complaints about products are examined, the causes of quality defects
       investigated and appropriate measures taken in respect of the defective
       products and to prevent reoccurrence.

Quality Control

1.9 Quality Control is that part of Good Manufacturing Practice which is concerned
with sampling, specifications and testing, and with the organisation, documentation
and release procedures which ensure that the necessary and relevant tests are actually
carried out and that materials are not released for use, nor products released for sale or


                                            5
supply, until their quality has been judged to be satisfactory. The basic requirements
of Quality Control are that:

       (i) Adequate facilities, trained personnel and approved procedures are
       available for sampling and testing starting materials, packaging materials,
       intermediate, bulk, and finished products, and where appropriate for
       monitoring environmental conditions for GMP purposes;

       (ii) Samples of starting materials, packaging materials, intermediate products,
       bulk products and finished products are taken by approved personnel and
       methods;

       (iii) Test methods are validated;

       (iv) Records are made, manually and/or by recording instruments, which
       demonstrate that all the required sampling, inspecting and testing procedures
       were actually carried out. Any deviations are fully recorded and investigated;

       (v) The finished products contain active ingredients complying with the
       qualitative and quantitative composition of the Marketing Authorisation or
       clinical trial authorisation, are of the purity required, and are enclosed within
       their proper containers and correctly labelled;

       (vi) Records are made of the results of inspection and that testing of materials,
       intermediate, bulk, and finished products is formally assessed against
       specification. Product assessment includes a review and evaluation of relevant
       production documentation and an assessment of deviations from specified
       procedures;

       (vii) No batch of product is released for sale or supply prior to certification by
       a Qualified Person that it is in accordance with the requirements of the
       relevant authorisations in accordance with annex 16;

       (viii) Sufficient reference samples of starting materials and products are
       retained in accordance with Annex 19 to permit future examination of the
       product if necessary and that the sample is retained in the final pack.

Product Quality Review

1.10 Regular periodic or rolling quality reviews of all authorised medicinal products,
including export only products, should be conducted with the objective of verifying
the consistency of the existing process, the appropriateness of current specifications
for both starting materials and finished product, to highlight any trends and to identify
product and process improvements. Such reviews should normally be conducted and
documented annually, taking into account previous reviews, and should include at
least:
        (i) A review of starting materials including packaging materials used in the
        product, especially those from new sources and in particular the review of
        supply chain traceability of active substances.



                                           6
       (ii) A review of critical in-process controls and finished product results.

       (iii) A review of all batches that failed to meet established specification(s) and
       their investigation.

       (iv) A review of all significant deviations or non-conformances, their related
       investigations, and the effectiveness of resultant corrective and preventive
       actions taken.

       (v) A review of all changes carried out to the processes or analytical methods.

       (vi) A review of Marketing Authorisation variations submitted, granted or
       refused, including those for third country (export only) dossiers.

       (vii) A review of the results of the stability monitoring programme and any
       adverse trends.

       (viii) A review of all quality-related returns, complaints and recalls and the
       investigations performed at the time.

       (ix) A review of adequacy of any other previous product process or equipment
       corrective actions.

       (x) For new marketing authorisations and variations to marketing
       authorisations, a review of post-marketing commitments.

       (xi) The qualification status of relevant equipment and utilities, e.g. HVAC,
       water, compressed gases, etc.

       (xii) A review of any contractual arrangements as defined in Chapter 7 to
       ensure that they are up to date.

1.11 The manufacturer and, where different, marketing authorisation holder should
evaluate the results of the review and an assessment made as to whether corrective
and preventive action or any revalidation should be undertaken, under the
Pharmaceutical Quality System. There should be management procedures for the
ongoing management and review of these actions and the effectiveness of these
procedures verified during self-inspection. Quality reviews may be grouped by
product type, e.g. solid dosage forms, liquid dosage forms, sterile products, etc. where
scientifically justified.

Where the marketing authorisation holder is not the manufacturer, there should be a
technical agreement in place between the various parties that defines their respective
responsibilities in producing the product quality review.




                                           7
Quality Risk Management

1.12 Quality risk management is a systematic process for the assessment, control,
communication and review of risks to the quality of the medicinal product. It can be
applied both proactively and retrospectively.

1.13 The principles of quality risk management are that:

       i) The evaluation of the risk to quality is based on scientific knowledge,
       experience with the process and ultimately links to the protection of the patient

       ii) The level of effort, formality and documentation of the quality risk
       management process is commensurate with the level of risk

Examples of the processes and applications of quality risk management can be found
inter alia in ICH Q9 which is reproduced in Part III of the Guide.




                                           8
