ANNEX 11

                       COMPUTERISED SYSTEMS


PRINCIPLE
       This annex applies to all forms of computerised systems used as part of a GMP
       regulated activities. A computerised system is a set of software and hardware
       components which together fulfil certain functionalities.

       The application should be validated; IT infrastructure should be qualified.

       Where a computerised system replaces a manual operation, there should be no
       resultant decrease in product quality, process control or quality assurance. There
       should be no increase in the overall risk of the process.



GENERAL

1.     Risk Management

       Risk management should be applied throughout the lifecycle of the computerised
       system taking into account patient safety, data integrity and product quality. As
       part of a risk management system, decisions on the extent of validation and data
       integrity controls should be based on a justified and documented risk assessment
       of the computerised system.

2.     Personnel

       There should be close cooperation between all relevant personnel such as
       Process Owner, System Owner, Authorised Persons and IT. All personnel should
       have appropriate qualifications, level of access and defined responsibilities to
       carry out their assigned duties.

3.     Suppliers and Service Providers

3.1    When third parties (e.g. suppliers, service providers) are used e.g. to provide,
       install, configure, integrate, validate, maintain (e.g. via remote access), modify or
       retain a computerised system or related service or for data processing, formal
       agreements must exist between the manufacturer and any third parties, and
       these agreements should include clear statements of the responsibilities of the
       third party. IT-departments should be considered analogous.
3.2    The competence and reliability of a supplier are key factors when selecting a
       product or service provider. The need for an audit should be based on a risk
       assessment.

3.3    Documentation supplied with commercial off-the-shelf products should be
       reviewed by regulated users to check that user requirements are fulfilled.


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -169-                           25 August 2023
                                                      Annex 11     Computerised systems




3.4    Quality system and audit information relating to suppliers or developers of
       software and implemented systems should be made available to inspectors on
       request.


PROJECT PHASE
4.     Validation

4.1    The validation documentation and reports should cover the relevant steps of the
       life cycle. Manufacturers should be able to justify their standards, protocols,
       acceptance criteria, procedures and records based on their risk assessment.

4.2    Validation documentation should include change control records (if applicable)
       and reports on any deviations observed during the validation process.

4.3    An up to date listing of all relevant systems and their GMP functionality (inventory)
       should be available.

       For critical systems an up-to-date system description detailing the physical and
       logical arrangements, data flows and interfaces with other systems or processes,
       any hardware and software pre-requisites, and security measures should be
       available.

4.4    User Requirements Specifications should describe the required functions of the
       computerised system and be based on documented risk assessment and GMP
       impact. User requirements should be traceable throughout the life-cycle.

4.5    The regulated user should take all reasonable steps to ensure that the system
       has been developed in accordance with an appropriate quality management
       system. The supplier should be assessed appropriately.

4.6    For the validation of bespoke or customised computerised systems there should
       be a process in place that ensures the formal assessment and reporting of quality
       and performance measures for all the life-cycle stages of the system.

4.7    Evidence of appropriate test methods and test scenarios should be
       demonstrated. Particularly, system (process) parameter limits, data limits and
       error handling should be considered. Automated testing tools and test
       environments should have documented assessments for their adequacy.

4.8    If data are transferred to another data format or system, validation should include
       checks that data are not altered in value and/or meaning during this migration
       process.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -170-                           25 August 2023
                                                     Annex 11      Computerised systems



OPERATIONAL PHASE

5.     Data

       Computerised systems exchanging data electronically with other systems should
       include appropriate built-in checks for the correct and secure entry and
       processing of data, in order to minimize the risks.

6.     Accuracy Checks

       For critical data entered manually, there should be an additional check on the
       accuracy of the data. This check may be done by a second operator or by
       validated electronic means. The criticality and the potential consequences of
       erroneous or incorrectly entered data to a system should be covered by risk
       management.

7.     Data Storage

7.1    Data should be secured by both physical and electronic means against damage.
       Stored data should be checked for accessibility, readability and accuracy. Access
       to data should be ensured throughout the retention period.

7.2    Regular back-ups of all relevant data should be done. Integrity and accuracy of
       backup data and the ability to restore the data should be checked during
       validation and monitored periodically.

8.     Printouts

8.1    It should be possible to obtain clear printed copies of electronically stored data.

8.2    For records supporting batch release it should be possible to generate printouts
       indicating if any of the data has been changed since the original entry.

9.     Audit Trails

       Consideration should be given, based on a risk assessment, to building into the
       system the creation of a record of all GMP-relevant changes and deletions (a
       system generated "audit trail"). For change or deletion of GMP-relevant data the
       reason should be documented. Audit trails need to be available and convertible
       to a generally intelligible form and regularly reviewed.

10.    Change and Configuration Management

       Any changes to a computerised system including system configurations should
       only be made in a controlled manner in accordance with a defined procedure.

11.    Periodic Evaluation

       Computerised systems should be periodically evaluated to confirm that they
       remain in a valid state and are compliant with GMP. Such evaluations should
       include, where appropriate, the current range of functionality, deviation records,




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -171-                           25 August 2023
                                                    Annex 11      Computerised systems



       incidents, problems, upgrade history, performance, reliability, security and
       validation status reports.

12.    Security

12.1   Physical and/or logical controls should be in place to restrict access to
       computerised system to authorised persons. Suitable methods of preventing
       unauthorised entry to the system may include the use of keys, pass cards,
       personal codes with passwords, biometrics, restricted access to computer
       equipment and data storage areas.

12.2   The extent of security controls depends on the criticality of the computerised
       system.

12.3   Creation, change, and cancellation of access authorisations should be recorded.

12.4   Management systems for data and for documents should be designed to record
       the identity of operators entering, changing, confirming or deleting data including
       date and time.

13.    Incident Management

       All incidents, not only system failures and data errors, should be reported and
       assessed. The root cause of a critical incident should be identified and should
       form the basis of corrective and preventive actions.

14.    Electronic Signature

       Electronic records may be signed electronically. Electronic signatures are
       expected to:

       a. have the same impact as hand-written signatures within the boundaries of the
          company,
       b. be permanently linked to their respective record,
       c. include the time and date that they were applied.

15.    Batch release

       When a computerised system is used for recording certification and batch
       release, the system should allow only Authorised Persons to certify the release
       of the batches and it should clearly identify and record the person releasing or
       certifying the batches. This should be performed using an electronic signature.

16.    Business Continuity

       For the availability of computerised systems supporting critical processes,
       provisions should be made to ensure continuity of support for those processes in
       the event of a system breakdown (e.g. a manual or alternative system). The time
       required to bring the alternative arrangements into use should be based on risk
       and appropriate for a particular system and the business process it supports.
       These arrangements should be adequately documented and tested.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -172-                          25 August 2023
                                                     Annex 11     Computerised systems



17.    Archiving

       Data may be archived. This data should be checked for accessibility, readability
       and integrity. If relevant changes are to be made to the system (e.g. computer
       equipment or programs), then the ability to retrieve the data should be ensured
       and tested.



GLOSSARY
Application
Software installed on a defined platform/hardware providing specific functionality.

Bespoke/Customised computerised system
A computerised system individually designed to suit a specific business process.

Commercial off-the-shelf software
Software commercially available, whose fitness for use is demonstrated by a broad
spectrum of users.

IT Infrastructure
The hardware and software such as networking software and operation systems, which
makes it possible for the application to function.

Life cycle
All phases in the life of the system from initial requirements until retirement including
design, specification, programming, testing, installation, operation, and maintenance.

Process owner
The person responsible for the business process.

System owner
The person responsible for the availability, and maintenance of a computerised system
and for the security of the data residing on that system.

Third Party
Parties not directly managed by the holder of the manufacturing and/or import
authorisation.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -173-                          25 August 2023
