ANNEX 15

                QUALIFICATION AND VALIDATION


PRINCIPLE

       This Annex describes the principles of qualification and validation which are
       applicable to the facilities, equipment, utilities and processes used for the
       manufacture of medicinal products and may also be used as supplementary
       optional guidance for active substances without introduction of additional
       requirements to Part II. It is a GMP requirement that manufacturers control the
       critical aspects of their particular operations through qualification and validation
       over the life cycle of the product and process. Any planned changes to the
       facilities, equipment, utilities and processes, which may affect the quality of the
       product, should be formally documented and the impact on the validated status
       or control strategy assessed. Computerised systems used for the manufacture of
       medicinal products should also be validated according to the requirements of
       Annex 11. The relevant concepts and guidance presented in ICH Q8, Q9, Q10
       and Q11 should also be taken into account.

GENERAL
       A quality risk management approach should be applied throughout the lifecycle
       of a medicinal product. As part of a quality risk management system, decisions
       on the scope and extent of qualification and validation should be based on a
       justified and documented risk assessment of the facilities, equipment, utilities and
       processes. Retrospective validation is no longer considered an acceptable
       approach.

       Data supporting qualification and/or validation studies which were obtained from
       sources outside of the manufacturers own programmes may be used provided
       that this approach has been justified and that there is adequate assurance that
       controls were in place throughout the acquisition of such data.


1.     ORGANISING AND PLANNING FOR QUALIFICATION AND
       VALIDATION
1.1    All qualification and validation activities should be planned and take the life cycle
       of facilities, equipment, utilities, process and product into consideration.

1.2    Qualification and validation activities should only be performed by suitably trained
       personnel who follow approved procedures.

1.3    Qualification/validation personnel should report as defined in the pharmaceutical
       quality system although this may not necessarily be to a quality management or
       a quality assurance function. However, there should be appropriate quality
       oversight over the whole validation life cycle.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -212-                           25 August 2023
                                                       Annex 15   Qualification and validation




1.4          The key elements of the site qualification and validation programme should be
             clearly defined and documented in a validation master plan (VMP) or equivalent
             document.

1.5          The VMP or equivalent document should define the qualification/validation
             system and include or reference information on at least the following:

        i.     Qualification and Validation policy;
       ii.     The organisational structure including roles and responsibilities for
               qualification and validation activities;
      iii.     Summary of the facilities, equipment, systems, processes on site and the
               qualification and validation status;
      iv.      Change control and deviation management for qualification and validation ;
       v.      Guidance on developing acceptance criteria;
      vi.      References to existing documents;
      vii.     The qualification and validation strategy, including requalification, where
               applicable.

1.6          For large and complex projects, planning takes on added importance and
             separate validation plans may enhance clarity

1.7          A quality risk management approach should be used for qualification and
             validation activities. In light of increased knowledge and understanding from any
             changes during the project phase or during commercial production, the risk
             assessments should be repeated, as required. The way in which risk
             assessments are used to support qualification and validation activities should be
             clearly documented.

1.8          Appropriate checks should be incorporated into qualification and validation work
             to ensure the integrity of all data obtained.


2.           DOCUMENTATION, INCLUDING VMP
2.1          Good documentation practices are important to support knowledge management
             throughout the product lifecycle.

2.2          All documents generated during qualification and validation should be approved
             and authorised by appropriate personnel as defined in the pharmaceutical quality
             system.

2.3          The inter-relationship between documents in complex validation projects should
             be clearly defined.

2.4          Validation protocols should be prepared which defines the critical systems,
             attributes and parameters and the associated acceptance criteria.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                           -213-                          25 August 2023
                                                   Annex 15    Qualification and validation



2.5    Qualification documents may be combined together, where appropriate, e.g.
       installation qualification (IQ) and operational qualification (OQ).

2.6    Where validation protocols and other documentation are supplied by a third party
       providing validation services, appropriate personnel at the manufacturing site
       should confirm suitability and compliance with internal procedures before
       approval. Vendor protocols may be supplemented by additional
       documentation/test protocols before use.

2.7    Any significant changes to the approved protocol during execution, e.g.
       acceptance criteria, operating parameters etc., should be documented as a
       deviation and be scientifically justified.

2.8    Results which fail to meet the pre-defined acceptance criteria should be recorded
       as a deviation, and be fully investigated according to local procedures. Any
       implications for the validation should be discussed in the report.

2.9    The review and conclusions of the validation should be reported and the results
       obtained summarised against the acceptance criteria. Any subsequent changes
       to acceptance criteria should be scientifically justified and a final recommendation
       made as to the outcome of the validation.

2.10   A formal release for the next stage in the qualification and validation process
       should be authorised by the relevant responsible personnel either as part of the
       validation report approval or as a separate summary document. Conditional
       approval to proceed to the next qualification stage can be given where certain
       acceptance criteria or deviations have not been fully addressed and there is a
       documented assessment that there is no significant impact on the next activity.


3.     QUALIFICATION STAGES FOR EQUIPMENT, FACILITIES,
       UTILITIES AND SYSTEMS.
3.1    Qualification activities should consider all stages from initial development of the
       user requirements specification through to the end of use of the equipment,
       facility, utility or system. The main stages and some suggested criteria (although
       this depends on individual project circumstances and may be different) which
       could be included in each stage are indicated below:

User requirements specification (URS)

3.2    The specification for equipment, facilities, utilities or systems should be defined
       in a URS and/or a functional specification. The essential elements of quality need
       to be built in at this stage and any GMP risks mitigated to an acceptable level.
       The URS should be a point of reference throughout the validation life cycle.

Design qualification (DQ)

3.3    The next element in the qualification of equipment, facilities, utilities, or systems
       is DQ where the compliance of the design with GMP should be demonstrated
       and documented. The requirements of the user requirements specification should
       be verified during the design qualification.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -214-                           25 August 2023
                                                           Annex 15     Qualification and validation




Factory acceptance testing (FAT) /Site acceptance testing (SAT)

3.4           Equipment, especially if incorporating novel or complex technology, may be
              evaluated, if applicable, at the vendor prior to delivery.

3.5           Prior to installation, equipment should be confirmed to comply with the URS/
              functional specification at the vendor site, if applicable.

3.6           Where appropriate and justified, documentation review and some tests could be
              performed at the FAT or other stages without the need to repeat on site at IQ/OQ
              if it can be shown that the functionality is not affected by the transport and
              installation.

3.7           FAT may be supplemented by the execution of a SAT following the receipt of
              equipment at the manufacturing site.

Installation qualification (IQ)

3.8           IQ should be performed on equipment, facilities, utilities, or systems.

3.9           IQ should include, but is not limited to the following:

        i.       Verification of the correct installation of components, instrumentation,
                 equipment, pipe work and services against the engineering drawings and
                 specifications;
       ii.       Verification of the correct installation against pre-defined criteria;
       iii.      Collection and collation of supplier operating and working instructions and
                 maintenance requirements;
       iv.       Calibration of instrumentation;
       v.        Verification of the materials of construction.

Operational qualification (OQ)

3.10          OQ normally follows IQ but depending on the complexity of the equipment, it may
              be performed as a combined Installation/Operation Qualification (IOQ).

3.11          OQ should include but is not limited to the following:

        i.       Tests that have been developed from the knowledge of processes, systems
                 and equipment to ensure the system is operating as designed;
       ii.       Tests to confirm upper and lower operating limits, and/or “worst case”
                 conditions.

3.12          The completion of a successful OQ should allow the finalisation of standard
              operating and cleaning procedures, operator training and preventative
              maintenance requirements.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                               -215-                            25 August 2023
                                                         Annex 15       Qualification and validation



Performance qualification (PQ)

3.13          PQ should normally follow the successful completion of IQ and OQ. However, it
              may in some cases be appropriate to perform it in conjunction with OQ or Process
              Validation.

3.14          PQ should include, but is not limited to the following:

        i.      Tests, using production materials, qualified substitutes or simulated product
                proven to have equivalent behaviour under normal operating conditions with
                worst case batch sizes. The frequency of sampling used to confirm process
                control should be justified;
        ii.     Tests should cover the operating range of the intended process, unless
                documented evidence from the development phases confirming the
                operational ranges is available.


4.            RE-QUALIFICATION
4.1           Equipment, facilities, utilities and systems should be evaluated at an appropriate
              frequency to confirm that they remain in a state of control.

4.2           Where re-qualification is necessary and performed at a specific time period, the
              period should be justified and the criteria for evaluation defined. Furthermore,
              the possibility of small changes over time should be assessed.



5.             PROCESS VALIDATION
General

5.1           The requirements and principles outlined in this section are applicable to the
              manufacture of all pharmaceutical dosage forms. They cover the initial validation
              of new processes, subsequent validation of modified processes, site transfers
              and ongoing process verification. It is implicit in this annex that a robust product
              development process is in place to enable successful process validation.

5.2           Section 5 should be used in conjunction with relevant guidelines on Process
              Validation1.

5.2.1 A guideline on Process Validation is intended to provide guidance on the
      information and data to be provided in the regulatory submission only. However
      GMP requirements for process validation continue throughout the lifecycle of the
      process
5.2.2 This approach should be applied to link product and process development. It will
      ensure validation of the commercial manufacturing process and maintenance of
      the process in a state of control during routine commercial production.




1             In the EU/EEA, see EMA/CHMP/CVMP/QWP/BWP/70278/2012


    PE 009-17 (Annexes)                          -216-                             25 August 2023
                                                  Annex 15    Qualification and validation



5.3    Manufacturing processes may be developed using a traditional approach or a
       continuous verification approach. However, irrespective of the approach used,
       processes must be shown to be robust and ensure consistent product quality
       before any product is released to the market. Manufacturing processes using the
       traditional approach should undergo a prospective validation programme
       wherever possible prior to certification of the product. Retrospective validation is
       no longer an acceptable approach.

5.4    Process validation of new products should cover all intended marketed strengths
       and sites of manufacture. Bracketing could be justified for new products based
       on extensive process knowledge from the development stage in conjunction with
       an appropriate ongoing verification programme.

5.5    For the process validation of products, which are transferred from one site to
       another or within the same site, the number of validation batches could be
       reduced by the use of a bracketing approach. However, existing product
       knowledge, including the content of the previous validation, should be available.
       Different strengths, batch sizes and pack sizes/ container types may also use a
       bracketing approach if justified.

5.6    For the site transfer of legacy products, the manufacturing process and controls
       must comply with the marketing authorisation and meet current standards for
       marketing authorisation for that product type. If necessary, variations to the
       marketing authorisation should be submitted.

5.7    Process validation should establish whether all quality attributes and process
       parameters, which are considered important for ensuring the validated state and
       acceptable product quality, can be consistently met by the process. The basis
       by which process parameters and quality attributes were identified as being
       critical or non-critical should be clearly documented, taking into account the
       results of any risk assessment activities.

5.8    Normally batches manufactured for process validation should be the same size
       as the intended commercial scale batches and the use of any other batch sizes
       should be justified or specified in other sections of the GMP guide.

5.9    Equipment, facilities, utilities and systems used for process validation should be
       qualified. Test methods should be validated for their intended use.

5.10   For all products irrespective of the approach used, process knowledge from
       development studies or other sources should be accessible to the manufacturing
       site, unless otherwise justified, and be the basis for validation activities.

5.11   For process validation batches, production, development, or other site transfer
       personnel may be involved. Batches should only be manufactured by trained
       personnel in accordance with GMP using approved documentation. It is expected
       that production personnel are involved in the manufacture of validation batches
       to facilitate product understanding.

5.12   The suppliers of critical starting and packaging materials should be qualified prior
       to the manufacture of validation batches; otherwise a justification based on the
       application of quality risk management principles should be documented.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -217-                           25 August 2023
                                                    Annex 15     Qualification and validation



5.13   It is especially important that the underlying process knowledge for the design
       space justification (if used) and for development of any mathematical models (if
       used) to confirm a process control strategy should be available.

5.14   Where validation batches are released to the market this should be pre-defined.
       The conditions under which they are produced should fully comply with GMP,
       with the validation acceptance criteria, with any continuous process verification
       criteria (if used) and with the marketing authorisation or clinical trial authorisation.

5.15   For the process validation of investigational medicinal products (IMP), please
       refer to Annex 13.

Concurrent validation
5.16   In exceptional circumstances, where there is a strong benefit-risk ratio for the
       patient, it may be acceptable not to complete a validation programme before
       routine production starts and concurrent validation could be used. However, the
       decision to carry out concurrent validation must be justified, documented in the
       VMP for visibility and approved by authorised personnel.

5.17   Where a concurrent validation approach has been adopted, there should be
       sufficient data to support a conclusion that any given batch of product is uniform
       and meets the defined acceptance criteria. The results and conclusion should
       be formally documented and available to the Authorised Person prior to
       certification of the batch.

Traditional process validation
5.18   In the traditional approach, a number of batches of the finished product are
       manufactured under routine conditions to confirm reproducibility.

5.19   The number of batches manufactured and the number of samples taken should
       be based on quality risk management principles, allow the normal range of
       variation and trends to be established and provide sufficient data for evaluation.
       Each manufacturer must determine and justify the number of batches necessary
       to demonstrate a high level of assurance that the process is capable of
       consistently delivering quality product.

5.20   Without prejudice to 5.19, it is generally considered acceptable that a minimum
       of three consecutive batches manufactured under routine conditions could
       constitute a validation of the process. An alternative number of batches may be
       justified taking into account whether standard methods of manufacture are used
       and whether similar products or processes are already used at the site. An initial
       validation exercise with three batches may need to be supplemented with further
       data obtained from subsequent batches as part of an on-going process
       verification exercise.

5.21   A process validation protocol should be prepared which defines the critical
       process parameters (CPP), critical quality attributes (CQA) and the associated
       acceptance criteria which should be based on development data or documented
       process knowledge.

5.22   Process validation protocols should include, but are not limited to the following:



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -218-                            25 August 2023
                                                          Annex 15   Qualification and validation




         i.     A short description of the process and a reference to the respective Master
                Batch Record;
        ii.     Functions and responsibilities;
       iii.     Summary of the CQAs to be investigated;
       iv.      Summary of CPPs and their associated limits;
        v.      Summary of other (non-critical) attributes and parameters which will be
                investigated or monitored during the validation activity, and the reasons for
                their inclusion;
       vi.      List    of  the     equipment/facilities to    be    used    (including
                measuring/monitoring/recording equipment) together with the calibration
                status;
       vii.     List of analytical methods and method validation, as appropriate;
   viii.        Proposed in-process controls with acceptance criteria and the reason(s) why
                each in-process control is selected;
       ix.      Additional testing to be carried out, with acceptance criteria;
        x.      Sampling plan and the rationale behind it;
       xi.      Methods for recording and evaluating results;
       xii.     Process for release and certification of batches (if applicable).


Continuous process verification

5.23          For products developed by a quality by design approach, where it has been
              scientifically established during development that the established control strategy
              provides a high degree of assurance of product quality, then continuous process
              verification can be used as an alternative to traditional process validation.

5.24          The method by which the process will be verified should be defined. There should
              be a science based control strategy for the required attributes for incoming
              materials, critical quality attributes and critical process parameters to confirm
              product realisation. This should also include regular evaluation of the control
              strategy. Process Analytical Technology and multivariate statistical process
              control may be used as tools. Each manufacturer must determine and justify the
              number of batches necessary to demonstrate a high level of assurance that the
              process is capable of consistently delivering quality product.

5.25          The general principles laid down in 5.1 – 5.14 above still apply.


Hybrid approach

5.26          A hybrid of the traditional approach and continuous process verification could be
              used where there is a substantial amount of product and process knowledge and
              understanding which has been gained from manufacturing experience and
              historical batch data.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                              -219-                             25 August 2023
                                                 Annex 15    Qualification and validation



5.27   This approach may also be used for any validation activities after changes or
       during ongoing process verification even though the product was initially
       validated using a traditional approach.

Ongoing Process Verification during Lifecycle

5.28   Paragraphs 5.28-5.32 are applicable to all three approaches to process validation
       mentioned above, i.e. traditional, continuous and hybrid.

5.29   Manufacturers should monitor product quality to ensure that a state of control is
       maintained throughout the product lifecycle with the relevant process trends
       evaluated.

5.30   The extent and frequency of ongoing process verification should be reviewed
       periodically. At any point throughout the product lifecycle, it may be appropriate
       to modify the requirements taking into account the current level of process
       understanding and process performance.

5.31   Ongoing process verification should be conducted under an approved protocol or
       equivalent documents and a corresponding report should be prepared to
       document the results obtained. Statistical tools should be used, where
       appropriate, to support any conclusions with regard to the variability and
       capability of a given process and ensure a state of control.

5.32   Ongoing process verification should be used throughout the product lifecycle to
       support the validated status of the product as documented in the Product Quality
       Review. Incremental changes over time should also be considered and the need
       for any additional actions, e.g. enhanced sampling, should be assessed.


6.     VERIFICATION OF TRANSPORTATION
6.1    Finished medicinal products, investigational medicinal products, bulk product and
       samples should be transported from manufacturing sites in accordance with the
       conditions defined in the marketing authorisation, the approved label, product
       specification file or as justified by the manufacturer.

6.2    It is recognised that verification of transportation may be challenging due to the
       variable factors involved however, transportation routes should be clearly
       defined. Seasonal and other variations should also be considered during
       verification of transport

6.3    A risk assessment should be performed to consider the impact of variables in the
       transportation process other than those conditions which are continuously
       controlled or monitored, e.g. delays during transportation, failure of monitoring
       devices, topping up liquid nitrogen, product susceptibility and any other relevant
       factors.

6.4    Due to the variable conditions expected during transportation, continuous
       monitoring and recording of any critical environmental conditions to which the
       product may be subjected should be performed, unless otherwise justified.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                     -220-                           25 August 2023
                                                  Annex 15    Qualification and validation




7.     VALIDATION OF PACKAGING
7.1    Variation in equipment processing parameters especially during primary
       packaging may have a significant impact on the integrity and correct functioning
       of the pack, e.g. blister strips, sachets and sterile components; therefore primary
       and secondary packaging equipment for finished and bulk products should be
       qualified.

7.2    Qualification of the equipment used for primary packing should be carried out at
       the minimum and maximum operating ranges defined for the critical process
       parameters such as temperature, machine speed and sealing pressure or for any
       other factors.


8.     QUALIFICATION OF UTILITIES
8.1    The quality of steam, water, air, other gases etc. should be confirmed following
       installation using the qualification steps described in section 3 above.

8.2    The period and extent of qualification should reflect any seasonal variations, if
       applicable, and the intended use of the utility.

8.3    A risk assessment should be carried out where there may be direct contact with
       the product, e.g. heating, ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems, or
       indirect contact such as through heat exchangers to mitigate any risks of failure.


9.     VALIDATION OF TEST METHODS
9.1    All analytical test methods used in qualification, validation or cleaning exercises
       should be validated with an appropriate detection and quantification limit, where
       necessary, as defined in Chapter 6 of the PIC/S GMP guide Part I.

9.2    Where microbial testing of product is carried out, the method should be validated
       to confirm that the product does not influence the recovery of microorganisms.

9.3    Where microbial testing of surfaces in clean rooms is carried out, validation
       should be performed on the test method to confirm that sanitising agents do not
       influence the recovery of microorganisms.


10.    CLEANING VALIDATION
10.1   Cleaning validation should be performed in order to confirm the effectiveness of
       any cleaning procedure for all product contact equipment. Simulating agents may
       be used with appropriate scientific justification. Where similar types of equipment
       are grouped together, a justification of the specific equipment selected for
       cleaning validation is expected.

10.2   A visual check for cleanliness is an important part of the acceptance criteria for
       cleaning validation. It is not generally acceptable for this criterion alone to be


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -221-                          25 August 2023
                                                           Annex 15      Qualification and validation



          used. Repeated cleaning and retesting until acceptable residue results are
          obtained is not considered an acceptable approach.

10.3     It is recognised that a cleaning validation programme may take some time to
         complete and validation with verification after each batch may be required for
         some products e.g. investigational medicinal products. There should be sufficient
         data from the verification to support a conclusion that the equipment is clean and
         available for further use.

10.4      Validation should consider the level of automation in the cleaning process. Where
          an automatic process is used, the specified normal operating range of the utilities
          and equipment should be validated.

10.5      For all cleaning processes an assessment should be performed to determine the
          variable factors which influence cleaning effectiveness and performance, e.g.
          operators, the level of detail in procedures such as rinsing times etc. If variable
          factors have been identified, the worst case situations should be used as the
          basis for cleaning validation studies.

10.6      Limits for the carryover of product residues should be based on a toxicological
          evaluation2. The justification for the selected limits should be documented in a
          risk assessment which includes all the supporting references. Limits should be
          established for the removal of any cleaning agents used. Acceptance criteria
          should consider the potential cumulative effect of multiple items of equipment in
          the process equipment train.

10.6.1 Therapeutic macromolecules and peptides are known to degrade and denature
       when exposed to pH extremes and/or heat, and may become pharmacologically
       inactive. A toxicological evaluation may therefore not be applicable in these
       circumstances.
10.6.2 If it is not feasible to test for specific product residues, other representative
       parameters may be selected, e.g. total organic carbon (TOC) and conductivity.

10.7      The risk presented by microbial and endotoxin contamination should be
          considered during the development of cleaning validation protocols.

10.8      The influence of the time between manufacture and cleaning and the time
          between cleaning and use should be taken into account to define dirty and clean
          hold times for the cleaning process.

10.9      Where campaign manufacture is carried out, the impact on the ease of cleaning
          at the end of the campaign should be considered and the maximum length of a
          campaign (in time and/or number of batches) should be the basis for cleaning
          validation exercises.

10.10 Where a worst case product approach is used as a cleaning validation model, a
      scientific rationale should be provided for the selection of the worst case product
      and the impact of new products to the site assessed. Criteria for determining the
      worst case may include solubility, cleanability, toxicity, and potency.


2         In the EU/EEA, this is the EMA Guideline on setting health based exposure limits for use in risk
          identification in the manufacture of different medicinal products in shared facilities



    PE 009-17 (Annexes)                           -222-                                25 August 2023
                                                 Annex 15   Qualification and validation




10.11 Cleaning validation protocols should specify or reference the locations to be
      sampled, the rationale for the selection of these locations and define the
      acceptance criteria.

10.12 Sampling should be carried out by swabbing and/or rinsing or by other means
      depending on the production equipment. The sampling materials and method
      should not influence the result. Recovery should be shown to be possible from
      all product contact materials sampled in the equipment with all the sampling
      methods used.

10.13 The cleaning procedure should be performed an appropriate number of times
      based on a risk assessment and meet the acceptance criteria in order to prove
      that the cleaning method is validated.

10.14 Where a cleaning process is ineffective or is not appropriate for some equipment,
      dedicated equipment or other appropriate measures should be used for each
      product as indicated in chapters 3 and 5 of the PIC/S GMP Guide.

10.15 Where manual cleaning of equipment is performed, it is especially important that
      the effectiveness of the manual process should be confirmed at a justified
      frequency.



11.    CHANGE CONTROL
11.1   The control of change is an important part of knowledge management and should
       be handled within the pharmaceutical quality system.

11.2   Written procedures should be in place to describe the actions to be taken if a
       planned change is proposed to a starting material, product component, process,
       equipment, premises, product range, method of production or testing, batch size,
       design space or any other change during the lifecycle that may affect product
       quality or reproducibility.

11.3   Where design space is used, the impact on changes to the design space should
       be considered against the registered design space within the marketing
       authorisation and the need for any regulatory actions assessed.

11.4   Quality risk management should be used to evaluate planned changes to
       determine the potential impact on product quality, pharmaceutical quality
       systems, documentation, validation, regulatory status, calibration, maintenance
       and on any other system to avoid unintended consequences and to plan for any
       necessary process validation, verification or requalification efforts.

11.5   Changes should be authorised and approved by the responsible persons or
       relevant functional personnel in accordance with the pharmaceutical quality
       system.

11.6   Supporting data, e.g. copies of documents, should be reviewed to confirm that
       the impact of the change has been demonstrated prior to final approval.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                     -223-                         25 August 2023
                                                   Annex 15    Qualification and validation




11.7   Following implementation, and where appropriate, an evaluation of the
       effectiveness of change should be carried out to confirm that the change has
       been successful.


12. GLOSSARY
Definitions of terms relating to qualification and validation which are not given in other
sections of the current PIC/S Guide to GMP are given below.

Bracketing approach:
       A science and risk based validation approach such that only batches on the
       extremes of certain predetermined and justified design factors, e.g. strength,
       batch size, and/or pack size, are tested during process validation. The design
       assumes that validation of any intermediate levels is represented by validation of
       the extremes. Where a range of strengths is to be validated, bracketing could be
       applicable if the strengths are identical or very closely related in composition, e.g.
       for a tablet range made with different compression weights of a similar basic
       granulation, or a capsule range made by filling different plug fill weights of the
       same basic composition into different size capsule shells. Bracketing can be
       applied to different container sizes or different fills in the same container closure
       system.
Change Control
       A formal system by which qualified representatives of appropriate disciplines
       review proposed or actual changes that might affect the validated status of
       facilities, systems, equipment or processes. The intent is to determine the need
       for action to ensure and document that the system is maintained in a validated
       state.
Cleaning Validation
       Cleaning validation is documented evidence that an approved cleaning procedure
       will reproducibly remove the previous product or cleaning agents used in the
       equipment below the scientifically set maximum allowable carryover level.
Cleaning verification
       The gathering of evidence through chemical analysis after each batch/campaign
       to show that the residues of the previous product or cleaning agents have been
       reduced below the scientifically set maximum allowable carryover level.

Concurrent Validation
     Validation carried out in exceptional circumstances, justified on the basis of
     significant patient benefit, where the validation protocol is executed concurrently
     with commercialisation of the validation batches.
Continuous process verification
       An alternative approach to process validation in which manufacturing process
       performance is continuously monitored and evaluated. (ICH Q8)




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -224-                            25 August 2023
                                                  Annex 15    Qualification and validation



Control Strategy:
       A planned set of controls, derived from current product and process
       understanding that ensures process performance and product quality. The
       controls can include parameters and attributes related to drug substance and
       drug product materials and components, facility and equipment operating
       conditions, in-process controls, finished product specifications, and the
       associated methods and frequency of monitoring and control. (ICH Q10)
Critical process parameter (CPP)
       A process parameter whose variability has an impact on a critical quality attribute
       and therefore should be monitored or controlled to ensure the process produces
       the desired quality. (ICH Q8)
Critical quality attribute (CQA)
       A physical, chemical, biological or microbiological property or characteristic that
       should be within an approved limit, range or distribution to ensure the desired
       product quality. (ICH Q8)
Design qualification (DQ)
       The documented verification that the proposed design of the facilities, systems
       and equipment is suitable for the intended purpose.
Design Space
       The multidimensional combination and interaction of input variables, e.g. material
       attributes, and process parameters that have been demonstrated to provide
       assurance of quality. Working within the design space is not considered as a
       change. Movement out of the design space is considered to be a change and
       would normally initiate a regulatory post approval change process. Design space
       is proposed by the applicant and is subject to regulatory assessment and
       approval. (ICH Q8)
Installation Qualification (IQ)
       The documented verification that the facilities, systems and equipment, as
       installed or modified, comply with the approved design and the manufacturer’s
       recommendations.
Knowledge management
       A systematic approach to acquire, analyse, store and disseminate information.
       (ICH Q10)
Lifecycle
       All phases in the life of a product, equipment or facility from initial development
       or use through to discontinuation of use.
Ongoing Process Verification (also known as continued process verification)
       Documented evidence that the process remains in a state of control during
       commercial manufacture.
Operational Qualification (OQ)
       The documented verification that the facilities, systems and equipment, as
       installed or modified, perform as intended throughout the anticipated operating
       ranges.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -225-                          25 August 2023
                                                   Annex 15    Qualification and validation



Performance Qualification (PQ)
       The documented verification that systems and equipment can perform effectively
       and reproducibly based on the approved process method and product
       specification.
Process Validation
       The documented evidence that the process, operated within established
       parameters, can perform effectively and reproducibly to produce a medicinal
       product meeting its predetermined specifications and quality attributes.
Product realisation
       Achievement of a product with the quality attributes to meet the needs of patients,
       health care professionals and regulatory authorities and internal customer
       requirements. (ICH Q10)
Prospective Validation
       Validation carried out before routine production of products intended for sale.
Quality by design
       A systematic approach that begins with predefined objectives and emphasises
       product and process understanding and process control, based on sound science
       and quality risk management.
Quality risk management
       A systematic process for the assessment, control, communication and review of
       risks to quality across the lifecycle. (ICH Q9)
Simulated agents
       A material that closely approximates the physical and, where practical, the
       chemical characteristics, e.g. viscosity, particle size, pH etc., of the product under
       validation.
State of control
       A condition in which the set of controls consistently provides assurance of
       acceptable process performance and product quality.
Traditional approach
       A product development approach where set points and operating ranges for
       process parameters are defined to ensure reproducibility.
User requirements Specification (URS)
       The set of owner, user, and engineering requirements necessary and sufficient
       to create a feasible design meeting the intended purpose of the system.
Worst Case
       A condition or set of conditions encompassing upper and lower processing limits
       and circumstances, within standard operating procedures, which pose the
       greatest chance of product or process failure when compared to ideal conditions.
       Such conditions do not necessarily induce product or process failure.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -226-                            25 August 2023
