ANNEX 2A


MANUFACTURE OF ADVANCED THERAPY MEDICINAL
        PRODUCTS FOR HUMAN USE


SCOPE
      The methods employed in the manufacture of Advanced Therapy Medicinal
      Products (ATMPs) are a critical factor in shaping the appropriate regulatory
      control. ATMPs can be defined therefore largely by reference to their method of
      manufacture. For example, for gene therapy ATMPs, genetic modifications can
      be obtained through a variety of methods (e.g. viral & non-viral vectors, mRNA,
      ex vivo and in vivo genome-editing tools). The genetically modified cells can be
      of human origin (autologous or allogeneic) or of animal origin (xenogeneic cells),
      either primary or established cell lines. In a medicinal product, the genetically
      modified cells or gene therapy products can be presented alone or combined with
      medical devices.

      This annex provides additional and specific guidance on the full range of ATMPs
      (as defined in the glossary) and the active substances that are used in their
      manufacture. This annex applies both to investigational ATMPs and market-
      authorised ATMPs. It can also be applied to ATMP manufacturing in hospital
      settings and for compassionate use programs, where authorised by national law.

      Although one of the objectives of this present annex was to prepare a document
      that would stand for several years, the field is quickly changing. It is recognised
      that amendments may be necessary to accommodate technological change, to
      clarify uncertainty or to specifically recognise important alternatives. Comments
      are therefore invited at any stage of the life of this edition.

      This annex is divided into two main parts:

      1.    Part A contains supplementary guidance and alternative provisions on the
            manufacture of ATMPs, from control over seed lots and cell banks through
            to finishing activities and testing.

      2.    Part B contains further guidance on selected types of ATMPs and its
            substances.


      APPLICATION OF THIS ANNEX

      This annex, along with several other annexes of the Guide to GMP, provides
      guidance, which supplements that in Part I: Basic Requirements for Medicinal
      Products and in Part II: Basic Requirements for active pharmaceutical ingredients
      of the PIC/S GMP Guide. This annex is not a stand-alone document and should
      be applied in conjunction with PIC/S GMP guidelines and annexes. It has



PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -68-                           25 August 2023
      Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



      however been written in a manner that it could enable development of a
      standalone guide if integrated with PIC/S GMP Part I, Part II, and related
      annexes.

      Where due to the nature of the product or technical necessities, specific guidance
      is provided in this annex, compliance with this annex is expected and takes
      precedence over other sections in the PIC/S GMP Guide unless there are good
      reasons for not doing so with documented sound scientific rationale applied using
      QRM principles.

     In certain cases, other national laws may be applicable to the starting materials
     for ATMPs. For example:

     (a) Tissues and cells used as starting materials of ATMPs may be subject to
         other national legislation that cover donation, procurement, testing,
         processing, preservation, storage and distribution.

     (b) For blood or blood components used as starting materials for ATMPs,
         national legislation may provide the technical requirements for the selection
         of donors and the collection and testing of blood and blood components.

     The manufacturing process for ATMPs is product-specific and different design
     approaches are possible. The appropriate application of GMP should be
     described, justified in the Clinical Trial Application (CTA) or Marketing
     Authorisation (MA), and in accordance with national law. Consideration may be
     given to defining which manufacturing process steps are required to manufacture
     starting materials, ATMP active substance, or the finished ATMP. In some cases,
     the manufacturing process between the ATMP active substance and the final
     product can be defined as continuous.

     The manufacture and control of genetically modified organisms also needs to
     comply with other local, national or regional requirements. Appropriate
     containment should be established and maintained in facilities where any
     genetically modified organism is handled. Advice should be obtained according
     to national law in order to establish and maintain the appropriate Biological Safety
     Level. GMP should be adhered alongside these requirements.

     Table 1 gives examples of where this annex applies. It should be noted that this
     table is illustrative only and is not meant to describe the precise scope. It should
     also be understood that adherence to the GMP or GMP principles for the
     manufacturing steps indicated in the corresponding table is dependent on
     applicable national legislation. The level of GMP requirements increases from
     early to later steps in the manufacture of ATMP active substances. The inclusion
     of some early steps of manufacture within the scope of this annex does not imply
     that those steps will be routinely subject to inspection by the authorities.
     According to national legislation more or less stringent approaches on the
     application of GMP on those early stages may apply.




PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -69-                           25 August 2023
             Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



Table 1. Illustrative guide to manufacturing activities within the scope of Annex 2A

   Example
                                              Application of this Annex (see note 1)
   Products

                   Linear DNA
 Gene therapy:                           In vitro cell free                                         Formulation,
                   template                                        mRNA purification
 mRNA                                    transcription                                              filling
                   preparation

 Gene therapy:
                   Plasmid               Establishment of MCB,     Vector manufacturing and         Formulation,
 in vivo viral
                   manufacturing         WCB2                      purification                     filling
 vectors

 Gene therapy:
 in vivo non-
 viral vectors
                   Plasmid               Establishment of                                           Formulation,
 (naked DNA,                                                       Fermentation and purification
                   manufacturing         bacterial bank2                                            filling
 lipoplexes,
 polyplexes,
 etc.)


 Gene therapy:     Donation,             Plasmid manufacturing
 ex-vivo           procurement and                                 Ex-vivo genetic modification     Formulation,
 genetically       testing of starting                             of cells                         filling
 modified cells    tissue / cells        Vector manufacturing3


                   Donation,
                                         Establishment of MCB,     Cell isolation, culture          Formulation,
 Somatic cell      procurement and
                                         WCB or primary cell lot   purification, combination with   combination,
 therapy           testing of starting
                                         or cell pool2             non-cellular components          filling
                   tissue / cells


                   Donation,             Initial processing,
 Tissue                                                            Cell isolation, culture,         Formulation,
                   procurement and       isolation and
 engineered                                                        purification, combination with   combination,
                   testing of starting   purification, establish
 products                                                          non-cellular components          filling
                   tissue / cells        MCB, WCB, primary
                                         cell lot or cell pool2




  1 Application of this annex applies to manufacturing steps illustrated in dark grey. Application of

    this annex or principles of this annex apply to steps illustrated in light grey apply depending on
    the requirements of national legislation.
  2 Refer to points 5.32 for establishment of cell banks and seed lots.

  3 In the case of gene therapy ex-vivo genetically modified cells, this guide applies to vector
    manufacturing except where otherwise authorised by national law where principles of GMP
    should apply.


    PE 009-17 (Annexes)                             -70-                            25 August 2023
            Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



   The following are some non-exhaustive examples in the application of GMP to the
          manufacture of ATMP.

Figure 1: Example of gene therapy mRNA                     Figure 2: Example of in vivo viral vector gene
          ATMP manufacturing                                         therapy ATMP manufacturing

 Linear DNA template         ATMP Manufacturing                  Plasmid                ATMP Manufacturing
     preparation                                               Manufacturing
                                 Transcription                                           Establishing MCB or
Plasmid DNA construct                    ↓                 Plasmid DNA construct                 WCB
      preparation                 Purification                   preparation                        ↓
            ↓                            ↓                            ↓                        Thawing
  Transfer of Plasmid               Harvest                  Transfer of Plasmid                    ↓
 DNA to starter colony                   ↓                  DNA to starter colony            Transfection
      (e.g. E. coli)              Formulation                   (e.g. E. coli)                      ↓
            ↓                            ↓                            ↓                       Induction
      Purification,                   Filling                    Expansion                          ↓
   linearization and                     ↓                            ↓                        Harvest
        polishing                   Storage                      Dispensing                         ↓
            ↓                            ↓                            ↓                      Purification
Storage of linear DNA            Distribution for                  Storage                          ↓
        template                 patient access                                              Formulation
                                                                                                    ↓
           OR                                                                              Sterile Filtration
                                                                                                    ↓
     Plasmid DNA                                                                                 Filling
 construct preparation                                                                              ↓
           ↓                                                                                   Storage
  Polymerase Chain                                                                                  ↓
    Reaction (PCR)                                                                         Distribution for
           ↓                                                                                patient access
 Storage of linear DNA
       template


 GMP requirements            A Marketing                  GMP requirements            A MAH may justify
  can vary from early          Authorisation Holder          can vary from early          these steps to be a
  steps in making the          (MAH) may justify             steps in making the          continuous process
  plasmid DNA                  these steps to be a           plasmid DNA                  producing both the
  construct to later           continuous process            construct to later           ATMP active
  steps but should align       producing both the            steps but should align       substance and
  with Annex 2A and            ATMP active                   with Annex 2A and            medicinal product.
  PIC/S GMP Guide              substance and                 PIC/S GMP Guide             PIC/S GMP Part I and
  Part II or principles of     medicinal product.            Part II or principles of     Part II along with
  these requirements as       PIC/S GMP Part I and          these requirements as        applicable annexes
  applicable under             Part II along with            applicable under             apply as appropriate
  national legislation.        applicable annexes            national legislation.        to the step of
 Refer to Section 5.23        apply as appropriate         Refer to Section 5.23        manufacture.
  for additional               to the step of                for additional
  information in               manufacture.                  information in
  determining the                                            determining the
  appropriate                                                appropriate
  application of GMP.                                        application of GMP.




    PE 009-17 (Annexes)                             -71-                            25 August 2023
         Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



Figure 3: Example of autologous CAR-T therapy ATMP manufacturing


    Plasmid Manufacturing             Viral Vector Product             ATMP Manufacturing
                                         Manufacturing

     Plasmid DNA construct          Establishing MCB or WCB         Donation or procurement of
          preparation                             ↓                        patient cells
                ↓                            Thawing                              ↓
   Transfer of Plasmid DNA to                     ↓                        Transduction
         starter colony                    Transfection                           ↓
          (e.g. E. coli)                          ↓                         Expansion
                ↓                            Induction                            ↓
           Expansion                              ↓                          Harvest
                ↓                             Harvest                             ↓
           Dispensing                             ↓                        Formulation
                ↓                           Purification                          ↓
             Storage                              ↓                            Filling
                                         Sterile Filtration                       ↓
                                                  ↓                          Storage
                                            Dispensing                            ↓
                                                  ↓                       Distribution for
                                              Storage                     patient access


   GMP requirements can            GMP requirements applied        The application of this
    vary from early steps in         to the manufacture of a          guide does not include the
    making the plasmid DNA           viral vector should align        donation or procurement of
    construct to later steps but     with Annex 2A and PIC/S          patient cells.
    should align with principles     GMP Part II or principles of    A MAH may justify these
    of Annex 2A and PIC/S            these requirements as            steps to be a continuous
    GMP Guide Part II or             applicable under national        process producing both the
    principles of these              legislation.                     ATMP active substance
    requirements as applicable      Refer to Section 5.23 for        and medicinal product.
    under national legislation.      additional information in       PIC/S GMP Part I and
   Refer to Section 5.23 for        determining the                  Part II along with
    additional information in        appropriate application of       applicable annexes apply
    determining the                  GMP.                             as appropriate to the step
    appropriate application of                                        of manufacture.
    GMP.




 PRINCIPLE
         The manufacture of ATMPs involves certain specific considerations arising from
         the nature of the products and the processes. The ways in which biological
         medicinal products are manufactured, controlled and administered make some
         particular precautions necessary.

         Since materials and processing conditions used in manufacturing processes are
         designed to provide conditions for the growth of specific cells and
         microorganisms, this provides an opportunity for extraneous microbial
         contaminants (e.g. bacteria, fungi) to grow. In addition, some products may be
         limited in their ability to withstand a wide range of purification techniques,
         particularly those designed to inactivate or remove adventitious viral


  PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -72-                           25 August 2023
      Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



      contaminants. The design of the processes, equipment, facilities, utilities, the
      conditions of preparation and addition of buffers and reagents, sampling and
      training of the operators are key considerations to minimise such contamination
      events (i.e. engineering and technical controls). In addition, manufacturing
      processes need to be well designed and controlled so as not to add further
      variability to the product.

      Product specifications such as those in pharmacopoeial monographs, CTA, and
      MA will dictate whether and to what manufacturing stage substances and
      materials can have a defined level of bioburden or need to be sterile. Similarly,
      manufacturing must be consistent with other specifications set out in the CTA or
      MA (e.g. number of generations (doublings, passages) between the seed lot or
      cell bank).

     For biological materials that cannot be sterilized (e.g. by filtration), processing
     must be conducted aseptically to minimise the introduction of contaminants.
     Where they exist, other guidance documents should be consulted on the
     validation of specific manufacturing methods (e.g. virus removal or inactivation).
     The application of appropriate environmental controls and monitoring and,
     wherever feasible, in-situ cleaning and sterilisation systems together with the use
     of closed systems and sterile disposable product-contact equipment can
     significantly reduce the risk of accidental contamination and cross-contamination.

     ATMPs require a combination of unique biological methods and standard
     physico-chemical assays for their Quality Control (QC). For many cell-based
     products, there is variability introduced through the starting materials that cannot
     be overcome by the manufacturing process or In-Process Controls (IPCs).
     Adequate control of the starting and raw materials, well defined characterisation
     of the ATMP active substance and ATMP drug product release testing form the
     crucial part of the QC. Controls should take into consideration the intrinsic
     variability of the biological material needed for ATMP manufacturing. A robust
     manufacturing process is therefore crucial and in-process controls take on a
     particular importance in the manufacture of biological active substances and
     medicinal products.


PART A: GENERAL GUIDANCE
     Part A provides alternative or supplementary provisions to respective sections in
     Part I, II and annexes of the PIC/S GMP Guide, where necessary. Where this
     annex provides specific guidance for the manufacture of ATMPs (including
     modification, replacement or redundancy of other sections), this will be clearly
     indicated. In the absence of specific guidance for ATMPs, compliance with other
     sections in the PIC/S GMP Guide is expected.

     Note: Where the term Marketing Authorisation Holder (MAH) is used, unless
     otherwise specified, it should be intended to signify the “Sponsor” for
     investigational ATMP that is used according to a CTA or equivalent.




PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -73-                           25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



SUPPLIMENTARY PROVISIONS TO PIC/S GMP GUIDE PART I

CHAPTER 1 PHARMACEUTICAL QUALITY SYSTEM
Pharmaceutical Quality System

1.1   ATMPs are not sold or supplied before an Authorised Person has certified that
      each production batch has been produced and controlled in accordance with the
      requirements of the CTA, MA and any other regulations relevant to the
      production, control and release of medicinal products as applicable. Special
      provisions apply for the supply of products that have a two-step release process
      (described in Section 6.14) or such that do not meet release specifications where
      there is no alternative treatment available (described in Sections 6.11 to 6.13).
      (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 1.4, xv)

Quality Risk Management

1.2   GMP applies to the lifecycle stages from the manufacture of investigational
      ATMP, technology transfer, and commercial manufacturing through to product
      discontinuation. The biological processes may display inherent variability, so that
      the range and nature of by-products may be variable. As a result, Quality Risk
      Management (QRM) principles as detailed in Annex 20 are particularly important
      for this class of medicinal products and should be used to develop their control
      strategy across all stages of development and manufacturing steps to minimise
      variability and to reduce the opportunity for contamination and
      cross-contamination. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 1.2)


CHAPTER 2 PERSONNEL
2.1   The health status of personnel should be taken into consideration for product
      safety. Personnel (including those concerned with cleaning, maintenance or
      quality control) employed in areas where ATMP active substances and products
      are manufactured and tested should receive training, and periodic retraining,
      specific to the products manufactured and to the duties assigned to them,
      including any specific safety measures to protect product, personnel and the
      environment.

2.2   Any changes in the health status of personnel, which could adversely affect the
      quality of the product, should prevent work in the production area. Health
      monitoring of staff should be commensurate with the risk; medical advice should
      be sought for personnel involved with hazardous organisms. General
      consideration should be given to Occupational Health & Safety (OH&S) for
      personnel involved with hazardous substances as required by national law.

2.3   Every person entering the manufacturing areas should wear clean protective
      garments appropriate to the operations to be carried out.

      Where required to minimise the opportunity for cross-contamination, restrictions
      on the movement of all personnel (including QC, maintenance and cleaning
      personnel) should be controlled based on QRM principles.


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                     -74-                           25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



      In general, personnel should not pass from areas of exposure to live
      micro-organisms, genetically modified organisms, toxins or animals to areas
      where other products, inactivated products or different organisms are handled. If
      such route is unavoidable, a Contamination Control Strategy (CCS) based on
      QRM principles should be applied (refer to Section 3.4 CCS). (Replaces PIC/S
      GMP Guide Part I Section 2.18)

CHAPTER 3 PREMISES AND EQUIPMENT

PREMISES
Production Areas

3.1   Cross-contamination should be prevented for all products by appropriate design
      and operation of manufacturing facilities. The measures to prevent cross-
      contamination should be commensurate with the risks to product quality. QRM
      principles should be used to assess and control the risks.

      Depending on the level of risk presented by some ATMPs and the materials
      involved in their production (for example, viruses), it may be necessary to
      dedicate premises and equipment for manufacturing and/or packaging operations
      to control the risk. Segregated production areas should be used for the
      manufacture of ATMPs presenting a risk that cannot be adequately controlled by
      operational and/or technical measures. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I
      Section 3.6)

3.2   Concurrent production of two or more different ATMPs/batches in the same area
      might be permitted due to adequate operational and/or technical control where
      justified under QRM principles applied across the entire sequence of
      manufacturing steps. For example:

      (a) The use of more than one closed isolator (or other closed systems) in the
          same room at the same time is acceptable, provided that appropriate
          mitigation measures are taken to avoid cross-contamination or mix-ups of
          materials.

      (b) When more than one isolator is used to process different viral vectors within
          the same room there should be 100% air exhaustion from the room and the
          facility (i.e. no recirculation). In addition, in case of concurrent production of
          viral vectors, it is necessary to provide for closed, separate and unidirectional
          waste handling.

      (c) The possibility of using more than one biosafety cabinet (BSC) in the same
          room is only acceptable if effective technical and organisational measures
          are implemented to separate the activities. The simultaneous use of more
          than one BSC entails additional risks and, therefore, it should be
          demonstrated that the measures implemented are effective to avoid risks to
          the quality of the product and any mix-ups. The rationale should be justified
          based on QRM principles.

      (d) The use of multiple closed systems in the same area is permitted, in the case
          that their close state can be demonstrated. (refer to point 3.13.)


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -75-                            25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use




3.3   The measures and procedures necessary for containment (i.e. for environment
      and operator safety) should not conflict with those for product quality.

3.4   Special precautions should be taken in the case of manufacturing activities
      involving infectious viral vectors (e.g. oncolytic viruses, replication competent
      vectors) that should be segregated based on a documented CCS and QRM
      principles. The manufacturer should justify the level of segregation required
      based on the CCS and through QRM principles. The outcome of the QRM
      process should determine the necessity for and extent to which the premises and
      equipment should be dedicated to a particular product. In some cases, dedicated
      facilities, dedicated areas or dedicated equipment may be required in accordance
      with the national law. Simultaneous incubation and/or storage of replication
      competent vectors/products, or infected materials/products, with other
      materials/products is not acceptable.

3.5   Air handling units should be designed, constructed and maintained to minimise
      the risk of cross-contamination between different manufacturing areas and may
      need to be specific for an area. Consideration, based on QRM principles, should
      be given to the use of single pass air systems.

3.6   If materials (such as culture media and buffers) have to be measured or weighed
      during the production process, small stocks may be kept in the production area
      for a specified duration based on defined criteria (e.g. duration of manufacture of
      the batch or of the campaign). (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 3.13)

3.7   Positive pressure areas should be used to process sterile products, but negative
      pressure in specific areas at the point of exposure of pathogens is acceptable for
      containment reasons. Where negative pressure areas or BSCs are used for
      aseptic processing of materials with particular risks (e.g. pathogens), they should
      be surrounded by a positive pressure clean zone of appropriate Grade. These
      pressure cascades should be clearly defined and continuously monitored with
      appropriate alarm settings as defined by Annex 1. The design of such areas
      should be such that measures put in place to prevent release of material into the
      surrounding environment should not compromise sterility assurance level (SAL)
      of the product and vice versa.

3.8   Air vent filters that are directly linked to the sterility of the product (e.g. to maintain
      the integrity of a closed system) should be hydrophobic, monitored during use
      (e.g. pressure differential monitoring if appropriate) and validated for their
      scheduled life span with integrity testing at appropriate intervals based on
      appropriate QRM principles. If pressure monitoring or integrity testing is
      technically not feasible for the filter system, vendor supplied information may be
      considered for approval. However, this has to be taken into account in the CCS
      as an additional risk factor especially for short shelf life ATMPs, where
      microbiological quality tests are not available at the time of batch release prior to
      medical product administration.

3.9   Drainage systems must be designed so that effluents can be effectively
      neutralised or decontaminated to minimise the risk of cross-contamination. They
      must comply with national law to minimize the risk of contamination of the external
      environment according to the risk associated with the biohazardous nature of
      waste materials. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 3.11)


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -76-                              25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use




3.10   The degree of environmental control of particulate and microbial contamination
       of the production premises should be adapted to the product and the production
       step, bearing in mind the potential level of contamination of the starting materials
       and the risks to the product. The microbiological environmental monitoring
       programme should be supplemented by the inclusion of methods to detect the
       presence of specific microorganisms (e.g. host organism, yeasts, moulds,
       anaerobes, etc.) where indicated by the QRM principles.

3.11   Where processes are not closed and there is exposure of the product to the
       immediate room environment without a subsequent microbial inactivation
       process, (e.g. during additions of supplements, media, buffers, gasses,
       manipulations) appropriate environmental conditions should be applied. For
       aseptic manipulations parameters in line with Annex 1 (i.e. Grade A with Grade
       B background) should be applied. The environmental monitoring program should
       include testing and monitoring of non-viable contamination, viable contamination
       and air pressure differentials. The monitoring locations should be determined
       having regards to the QRM principles. The number of samples, volume, and
       frequency of monitoring, alert and action limits should be appropriate taking into
       account the QRM principles. Sampling methods should not pose a risk of
       contamination to the manufacturing operations. Where appropriate control is
       required in the process, temperature and relative humidity should be monitored.
       All environmental monitoring results should be trended.

3.12   Only in exceptional circumstances when an appropriate manufacturing
       environment is not available, a less stringent environment than that specified in
       Section 3.11 above may be acceptable for processes that are not closed where
       approved by the Competent Authority and in accordance with CTA or MA or other
       national requirements. However, this option should be considered exceptional
       and applicable only if the product is intended to treat a life-threatening condition
       where no alternative therapeutic options exist. The environment must be
       specified and justified to provide patient benefit that outweighs the significant risk
       created by manufacturing under less stringent environments. If the Competent
       Authority grants an approval, the manufacturer must pursue establishing the
       appropriate environment as improvements in the technology occur.

3.13   For closed systems, a lower classified area than Grade A in background Grade B
       might be acceptable based on the outcome of a QRM assessment. The
       appropriate level of air classification and monitoring should be determined having
       regard to the specific risks, considering the nature of the product, the
       manufacturing process and the equipment used. QRM should be used to
       determine whether the technology used supports reduced monitoring, in
       particular where monitoring can be a source of contamination. This is in addition
       to:

           (a) The use of technologies as e.g. processing inside single use sterile
               disposable kits, or processing using closed, automated manufacturing
               platform or incubation in closed flasks, bags or fermenters in Grade C
               may be acceptable if adequate control measures are implemented to
               avoid the risk of microbial contamination and cross-contamination (e.g.
               appropriate control of materials, personnel flows and cleanliness).
               Particular attention should be paid if the materials are subsequently
               moved to a clean area of higher Grade.


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -77-                            25 August 2023
          Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use




              (b) If the closed system can be shown to remain integral throughout the
                  entire usage, a background of Grade D might be acceptable.

         Requirements of Annex 1 regarding the provision of closed system should be
         considered.

3.14     In exceptional circumstances, it is permissible to perform a manufacturing step in
         premises that are not under direct control of the ATMP manufacturer or MAH
         (including for example placing equipment used to perform manufacturing steps in
         hospital wards or theatre) where approved by the Competent Authority and in
         accordance with CTA or MA or other national requirements. In such cases, it
         should be demonstrated that the process maintains its validated status in
         accordance to principles and guidelines in Annex 15, Annex 20 and in this annex.
         These arrangements should be subject to approval by the Competent Authority.
         The responsibilities of each parties should be defined in written technical
         agreements.


EQUIPMENT
3.15     Production equipment should not present any hazard to the products. The parts
         of the production equipment that come into contact with the product must not be
         reactive, additive or absorptive to such an extent that it will affect the quality of
         the product and thus present any hazard.

         In addition, if single use systems (i.e. disposable systems) are used, the
         manufacturer should take into account and verify the impact on the product from
         extractable, leachable, insoluble particulate and insoluble matter derived from
         such systems. Annex 1 regarding provisions for single use systems should be
         considered. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 3.39)

3.16     Where required to minimise the risk of cross-contamination, restrictions on the
         movement of equipment should be applied. In general, equipment should not be
         moved from high-risk areas to other areas, or between high-risk areas (e.g.
         equipment used for the handling of cells from infected donors or the handling of
         oncolytic viruses). Where the relocation of equipment is unavoidable, after
         reviewing engineering and/ or technical modifications, the risk should be
         assessed in line with QRM principles, mitigated and monitored to ensure an
         effective cross-contamination control strategy (refer to Section 3.4 CCS). The
         qualification status of the equipment moved should also be considered.

3.17     The design of equipment used during handling of live organisms and cells,
         including those for sampling, should be considered to prevent any contamination
         during processing.

3.18     Primary containment4 should be designed and periodically tested to ensure the
         prevention of escape of biological agents into the immediate working
         environment.



4         See Main GMP Glossary on ‘Containment’.


    PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -78-                            25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



3.19   Electronic systems used to support manufacturing must be qualified in
       accordance with Annex 11 and 15. Any analytical testing performed on materials
       not used in manufacturing but that support bioinformatics informing the
       manufacturing process (e.g. patient gene sequencing) should be validated. Such
       analytical equipment is expected to be qualified prior to use.

CHAPTER 4 DOCUMENTATION
Specifications

4.1    Specifications for ATMP starting and raw materials may need additional
       documentation on the source, origin, distribution chain, method of manufacture,
       and controls applied, to assure an appropriate level of control and oversight
       including their microbiological quality.

4.2    Some products may require specific definition of what materials constitute a
       batch. For autologous and donor-matched situations, the manufactured product
       should be viewed as a batch.

Traceability

4.3    Where human cells or tissues are used, full traceability is required from starting
       and raw materials, including all substances coming into contact with the cells or
       tissues through to confirmation of the receipt of the products at the point of use
       whilst maintaining the privacy of individuals and confidentiality of health-related
       information, according to national legislation.

4.4    For starting materials of human origin, the identification of the supplier and the
       anatomical environment from which the cells/tissues/virus originates (or, as
       appropriate, the identification of the cell-line, master cell bank, seed lot) should
       also be described.

4.5    A system that enables the bidirectional tracking of cells/tissues contained in
       ATMPs from the point of donation, through manufacturing, to the delivery of the
       finished product to the recipient should be created. This system can be manual
       or automated. It should be used throughout the manufacturing lifecycle to include
       clinical trial and commercial batches.

4.6    Traceability records should be kept as an auditable document and unequivocally
       linked to the relevant batch record. The storage system should ensure that
       traceability data allow for easy access, in case of an adverse reaction from the
       patient.

4.7    Traceability records for cellular and tissue-based products and for any
       personalized ATMP must be retained 30 years after the expiry date of the product
       unless otherwise specified in the MA/CTA or national law. Particular care should
       be taken to maintain the traceability of products for special use cases, such as
       donor-matched cells. National requirements applied to blood components in
       regard to traceability requirements and notification of serious adverse reactions
       and events apply to blood components when they are used as starting or raw
       materials in the manufacturing process of medicinal products. Human cells




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -79-                           25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



      including haematopoietic cells must comply with the principles laid down in
      national law concerning traceability.

4.8   When xenogeneic cells are used as starting materials for ATMPs, information
      permitting the identification of the donor animal should be kept for 30 years unless
      otherwise specified in the MA/CTA or national legislation.

CHAPTER 5 PRODUCTION
General

5.1   ATMPs must comply with the applicable national requirements on minimising the
      risk of transmitting animal spongiform encephalopathy agents via human and
      veterinary medicinal products.

      Viral safety for gene therapy ATMPs should be ensured by having systems in
      place that ensure the quality of starting (including cell banks and viral seed
      stocks) and raw materials through the production process.

5.2   The conditions for sample collection, additions and transfers involving replication
      competent vectors or materials from infected donors should prevent the release
      of viral/infected material.

5.3   At every stage of processing, materials and products should be protected from
      microbial and any other contamination. Appropriate contamination control and
      monitoring strategies should be implemented (refer to Section 3.4 CCS).
      Particular consideration should be given to the risk of cross-contamination
      between cell preparations from different donors and, where applicable, from
      donors having different positive serological markers. (Replaces PIC/S GMP
      Guide Part I Section 5.10)

5.4   The use of antimicrobials may be necessary to reduce bioburden associated with
      the procurement of living tissues and cells. However, the use of antimicrobials
      does not replace the requirement for aseptic manufacturing. When antimicrobials
      are used, their use should be recorded; they should be removed as soon as
      possible, unless the presence thereof in the finished product is specifically
      foreseen in the CTA or MA (e.g. antibiotics that are part of the matrix of the
      finished product). Additionally, it is important to ensure that antimicrobials do not
      interfere with any product microbial contamination testing or sterility testing, and
      that they are not present in the finished product (unless specifically justified in the
      CTA or MA).

5.5   Labels applied to containers, equipment or premises should be clear, well defined
      and in the manufacturer’s agreed format.

      Care should be taken in the preparation, printing, storage and application of
      labels, including any specific text for patient-specific or autologous product. For
      products containing cells derived from human cells or tissue, donor’s labels
      should contain all relevant information that is needed to provide full traceability.
      In the case of autologous products, the unique patient identifier and the statement
      “for autologous use only” should be indicated on the outer packaging or, where




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -80-                             25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



       there is no outer packaging, on the immediate packaging or as otherwise
       specified in national law.

       Alternative approaches/measures are permitted as long as the risk of erroneous
       administration of the product is adequately mitigated. For investigational ATMPs
       that are blinded, the requirement to state “autologous use” can be substituted by
       a barcode or an alternative equivalent mechanism that ensures blinding while
       maintaining patient safety. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 5.13)

5.6    When setting up a programme for primary and secondary packaging operations,
       particular attention should be given to minimising the risk of cross-contamination,
       mix-ups or substitutions. Sterility and/or low bioburden requirements should be
       adhered to and segregation strategies should be applied. (Replaces PIC/S GMP
       Guide Part I Section 5.49)

5.7    If closed systems are used for the production of ATMPs, checks should be carried
       out to ensure that all pieces of the equipment are connected in a correct manner
       to assure the closed state. Special attention should be given to apply these tests
       to automated systems. If feasible and based on QRM principles, for example
       considering testing carried out by vendors, the integrity of single use systems
       should be verified at adequate frequency prior to use and potentially post use,
       possibly automatically. The integrity of reused equipment should be verified
       before use after cleaning and sterilisation.

5.8    A system is no longer considered closed when materials are added or withdrawn
       without aseptic techniques (e.g. without use of sterile connectors or filters
       aseptically connected).

5.9    Where chromatography equipment is used, a suitable control strategy for
       matrices, the housings and associated equipment (adapted to the risks) should
       be implemented when used in campaign manufacture and in multi-product
       environments. The re-use of the same matrix at different stages of processing is
       discouraged due to risk of carryover contamination. Any such re-usage should be
       supported by appropriate validation data. Acceptance criteria, operating
       conditions, regeneration methods, life span, and sanitization or sterilisation
       methods of chromatography columns should be defined.

5.10   Careful attention should be paid to specific requirements at any cryopreservation
       stages, e.g. the rate of temperature change during freezing or thawing. The type
       of storage chamber, placement and retrieval process should minimise the risk of
       cross-contamination, maintain the quality of the products and facilitate their
       accurate retrieval. Documented procedures should be in place for the secure
       handling and storage of products with positive serological markers.

5.11   The suitability of selected packaging material should be considered. The
       adhesiveness, durability and legibility of printed text of labels used for containers
       that are stored at ultra-low temperatures (- 60 °C or lower) should be verified.
       Additionally, apply a holistic approach to minimize the risk to container closure
       integrity (CCI) that can occur during storage at ultra-low temperatures. Evidence‐
       based data should be generated to support the selection of the appropriate
       primary packaging components and qualification of the container/closure sealing
       process.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -81-                            25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



Prevention of Cross-contamination in Production

5.12   An evidence-based QRM process should be used to assess and control the
       cross-contamination risks presented by the products manufactured. Factors to
       take into account include:

       (a) vectors used and the risk of occurrence of replication competent virus
           (including different level of risk derived from the use of replication limited,
           replication defective, conditional replication and replication incompetent
           vectors),

       (b) facility/equipment design and use,

       (c) personnel and material flow,

       (d) microbiological and other adventitious agent controls,

       (e) characteristics of the starting materials/active substance and raw materials,

       (f) process characteristics,

       (g) clean room conditions,

       (h) cleaning processes, and

       (i) analytical capabilities relative to the relevant limits established from the
           evaluation of the products.

       The outcome of the QRM process should be the basis for determining the process
       workflow and necessity for and extent to which premises and equipment should
       be dedicated or single use systems should be used for a particular product. This
       may include dedicating specific product contact parts or dedication of the entire
       manufacturing facility. It may be acceptable to confine manufacturing activities to
       a segregated, self-contained production area within a multiproduct facility, where
       justified. Results should be reviewed jointly with the CCS.
       (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 5.20)

5.13   The methods used for sterilisation, disinfection, virus removal or inactivation
       should be validated. In cases where a virus inactivation or removal process is
       performed during manufacture, measures to avoid the risk of recontamination
       should be taken. (refer to Section 5.19(a))

5.14   An emergency plan for dealing with accidental release of viable organisms should
       be in place. This should address methods and procedures for containment,
       protection of operators, cleaning, decontamination and safe return to use.
       Accidental spillages, especially of live organisms, must be dealt with quickly and
       safely. Decontamination measures should be available for each organism or
       groups of related organisms in line with the QRM process. Decontamination
       measures should be validated for effectiveness.

5.15   If obviously contaminated, such as by spills or aerosols, or if a potential
       hazardous organism is involved, production and control materials, including


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -82-                           25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



       paperwork, must be adequately disinfected, or the information transferred out by
       other means. An assessment of the impact on the immediate products and any
       others in the affected area should also be made.

5.16   The risks of cross-contamination should be assessed having regard to the
       characteristics of the product (e.g. biological characteristics of the starting
       materials, possibility to withstand purification techniques) and manufacturing
       process (e.g. the use of processes that provide extraneous microbial
       contaminants the opportunity to grow). For ATMPs that cannot be sterilised, any
       open processing (e.g. filling) must be conducted aseptically to minimise the
       introduction of contaminants.

5.17   In all manufacturing steps that may lead to unwanted formation of aerosols (e.g.
       centrifugation, working under vacuum, homogenisation, and sonication)
       appropriate mitigation measures should be implemented to avoid cross-
       contamination. Special precautions should be taken when working with infectious
       materials.

5.18   Measures to prevent cross-contamination appropriate to the risks identified
       should be put in place. Measures that can be considered to prevent cross-
       contamination include, among others:

       (a) segregated premises,

       (b) dedicating the entire manufacturing facility or a self-contained production
           area on a campaign basis (separation in time) followed by a cleaning process
           of validated effectiveness,

       (c) adequate cleaning procedures:

               i.   the cleaning procedure (technique, number of sanitation steps, etc.)
                    should be adapted to the specific characteristics of the product and
                    of the manufacturing process;

              ii.   a risk-assessment should be used to determine the cleaning and
                    decontamination procedures that are necessary, including the
                    frequency thereof;

             iii.   as a minimum, there should be appropriate cleaning and
                    decontamination between each batch; and

             iv.    all cleaning and decontamination procedures should be validated.

       (d) use of “closed systems” for processing and for material or product transfer
           between individual processing equipment,

       (e) use of air locks and pressure cascade to confine potential airborne
           contaminant within a specified area,

       (f) utilisation of single use systems,

       (g) other suitable organisational measures, such as the:




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -83-                          25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



               i.    dedication of certain parts of equipment (e.g. filters) to a given type
                     of product with a specific risk profile;

              ii.    keeping specific protective clothing inside areas where products with
                     high-risk of contamination are processed;

              iii.   implementing adequate measures to handling waste, contaminated
                     rinsing water and soiled gowning; and

              iv.    imposing restrictions on the movement of personnel.
             (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 5.21)

Validation

5.19   During process validation potential limited availability of quantities of tissue/cells
       has to be taken into account. A strategy on gaining maximum process knowledge
       has to be implemented.

       Validation studies should be conducted in accordance with defined procedures.
       Results and conclusions should be recorded, in particular:

       (a) ATMPs manufactured for exploratory, early phase clinical trials (phase I and
           phase I/II), are expected to be validated proportionately with the knowledge
           and the risk associated with the respective phase. All aseptic and sterilisation
           processes as well as virus inactivation or removal for investigational and
           authorised ATMPs are expected to be validated. The effectiveness of
           disinfection methods should be proven. For all phases, the principles as
           outlined in Annex 13 should be applied.

       (b) For all aseptic processes, aseptic process simulations should be performed
           as part of initial validation and repeated thereafter every six months in line
           with Annex 1. In the case of infrequent production (i.e. if the interval between
           the production of two batches is more than six months but less than a year),
           it is acceptable that the process simulation test is done prior to manufacturing
           of the next batch. This is provided that, the results of the process simulation
           test are available prior to the starting of production. Any deviation from this
           approach needs to be thoroughly justified by QRM principles considering all
           aspects of product nature, product quality and patient safety.

       (c) If the ATMP is not produced on a routine basis (i.e. over a year), the aseptic
           process simulation should be conducted at least in triplicate prior to the start
           of manufacturing, involving all relevant operators. QRM principles should be
           applied in accordance with Annex 1. Any deviation from this approach needs
           to be thoroughly justified by QRM principles considering all aspects of product
           nature, product quality and patient safety.

       (d) The use of surrogate material during process validation may be acceptable
           when there is shortage of the starting materials (e.g. autologous ATMPs,
           allogeneic in a matched-donor scenario, allogeneic where there is no
           expansion of cells to MCB). The representativeness of surrogate starting
           material should be evaluated, including – for example – donor age, use of
           materials from healthy donors, anatomical source (e.g. femur vs. iliac crest)



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -84-                            25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



           or other different characteristics (e.g. use of representative cell-types or use
           of cells at a higher passage number than that foreseen in the product
           specifications).

       (e) Where possible, consideration should be given to complementing the use of
           surrogate materials with samples from the actual starting materials for key
           aspects of the manufacturing process. For instance, in the case of an ATMP
           based on modification of autologous cells to treat a genetic disorder, process
           validation using the autologous cells (affected by the condition) may be
           limited to those parts of the process that focus on the genetic modification
           itself. Other aspects could be validated using a representative surrogate cell
           type.
       (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 5.23)

Control of different types of materials including ATMP Active Substances

5.20   For the approval and maintenance of suppliers of materials, the following is
       required:

       ATMP Active substances

       The supply chain traceability should be established. Associated risks, from active
       substance starting materials to the finished medicinal product, should be formally
       assessed and periodically verified. Appropriate measures should be put in place
       to reduce risks to the quality of the active substance.

       The supply chain and traceability records for each active substance should be
       available and be retained by the manufacturer of the ATMP.

       Raw materials and process aids

       Prior to setting up the manufacturing process and whenever a change of the
       respective material is implemented, a QRM process should assess the risk of
       contamination from the relevant materials as well as their influence on the entire
       manufacturing process and the resulting product. Appropriate measures should
       be put in place to reduce risks to the quality of the materials.

       Material directly in contact with the ATMP during manufacture and storage

       All materials that come in direct contact with the ATMP should be of appropriate
       quality. The risk of microbiological contamination should be assessed especially
       for single use systems.
       (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 5.29)

5.21   Only materials that have been released by the Quality Unit and that are within
       their expiration or retest date should be used. Where the results of necessary
       tests are not available, it may be permissible to process materials before the
       results of the tests are available, the risk of using a potentially failed material and
       its potential impact on other batches should be clearly described and assessed
       under the principles of QRM. In such cases, release of a finished product is




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -85-                             25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



       conditional on satisfactory results of these tests. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide
       Part I Section 5.34)

5.22   A regular qualification of the vendors (e.g. manufacturers and distributors) of all
       materials to confirm that they comply with the relevant GMP requirements should
       be performed. Whether an on-site audit needs to be performed at a
       manufacturer’s or distributor’s premises should be defined based on QRM
       principles. Generally, audits need to be performed at vendors of all materials
       defined as critical for the manufacturing process according to its product risk
       profile (PRP). Refer to provisions detailed in Chapter 7 as modified by this annex.

5.23   Application of QRM principles to the total supply chain is a critical part of the
       process to understand the risks to material quality. The principles of quality by
       design (QbD) as described in ICH Q8 Guideline on Pharmaceutical Development
       could be applied:

       (a) The MAH should define what constitutes ATMP active substances, starting
           materials, raw materials and other materials such as single use systems,
           primary packaging materials and any other materials in direct contact with the
           product during manufacture by means of Product Risk Profiles (PRP). The
           PRP should be used to justify the levels of control that apply to individual
           materials.

       (b) Establish the Quality Target Product Profile (QTPP) and define the Critical
           Quality Attributes (CQA) and the Critical Process Parameters (CPP) for the
           ATMP to establish PRP appropriately.

       (c) For each material used, identify the risks presented to the quality, safety and
           function from its source through to its incorporation in the finished product
           dosage form. Areas for consideration should include, but are not limited to:

                i.   transmissible spongiform encephalopathy;

                ii. potential for viral contamination;

                iii. potential for microbiological or endotoxin/pyrogen contamination;

                iv. potential, in general, for any impurity originating from the raw
                    materials, or generated as part of the process and carried over;

                v. sterility assurance for materials claimed to be sterile;

                vi. potential for any impurities carried over from other processes, in
                    absence of dedicated equipment and/or facilities;

                vii. environmental control and storage/transportation          conditions
                     including cold chain management; if appropriate and

                viii. stability.

       (d) With respect to the use and function of each material, consider the following:




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -86-                           25 August 2023
      Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



              i.   pharmaceutical form and use of the medicinal product containing the
                   material;

              ii. function of the material in the formulation, and for gene therapy
                  products the impact on the gene expression of that material;

              iii. degree of which the function of the final product is dependent from
                   the material assessed and how likely it is to be controlled further into
                   the manufacturing process (i.e. if the gene sequence is wrong how
                   easily can this be detected and corrected or if the product is
                   contaminated how likely can this be detected or corrected later in the
                   manufacturing process);

              iv. time of preparation of the material in respect to the time of
                  administration of the final product;

              v. quantity of material with particular reference to the implication of
                 small final product batch sizes (e.g. 5-50 mg);

              vi. any known quality defects/fraudulent adulterations, both globally and
                  at a local company level related to the material;

              vii. known or potential impact on the CQA and CPP of the ATMP; and

              viii. other factors as identified or known to be relevant to assuring patient
                    safety.

      (e) Document the risk profile as low, medium, or high based on the above
          assessment and use this outcome to determine the PRP. On this basis, the
          MAH should establish and document the elements of PIC/S GMP that are
          needed to be in place in order to control and maintain the QTPP.

      (f) Once the PRP and the appropriate GMP have been defined, ongoing risk
          review should be performed through mechanisms such as:

              i.   number of defects connected to batches of respective material
                   received;

              ii. type/severity of such defects;

              iii. monitoring and trend analysis of material quality;

              iv. observation of trends in drug product quality attributes; this will
                  depend on the nature and role of material; and

              v. observed organisational, procedural or technical/process changes at
                 the material manufacturer.

      (g) Incorporate the PRP into the CTA or MA as applicable.

      (h) The QTPP, once approved in the production process by the Competent
          Authority, should guide the manufacturer through what controls are important
          and expected and which can be exempted. The manufacturer should have a


PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -87-                             25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



           control strategy established that justifies the level of testing performed for
           incoming starting materials.

5.24   Particular attention should be paid to avoiding contamination and to minimising
       the variability of the materials. Specifications related to the product (such as those
       in pharmacopoeial monographs, CTA, or MA), will dictate whether and to what
       stage substances and materials can have a defined level of bioburden or need to
       be sterile.

5.25   For products where final sterilisation is not possible and the ability to remove
       microbial by-products is limited, the controls required for the quality of materials
       and on the aseptic manufacturing process assume greater importance. Where a
       CTA or MA provides for an allowable type and level of bioburden, for example at
       the ATMP active substance stage, the control strategy should address the means
       by which this is maintained within the specified limits.

5.26   The selection, qualification, approval and maintenance of suppliers of starting
       materials, raw materials and materials that come in direct contact with the
       products during manufacture and storage (e.g. single use systems) together with
       their purchase and acceptance should be documented as part of the
       pharmaceutical quality system. The level of oversight should be proportionate to
       the risks posed by the individual materials taking account of their source,
       manufacturing process, supply chain complexity and the final use to which the
       material is put in the ATMP. The supporting evidence for each supplier / material
       approval should be maintained. Personnel involved in these activities should
       have a current knowledge of the suppliers, the supply chain and the associated
       risks involved. Where possible, these materials should be purchased directly from
       the manufacturer or a manufacturer approved supplier. (Replaces PIC/S GMP
       Guide Part I Section 5.27)

5.27   For starting material of human origin, the agreement between the ATMP
       manufacturer (or, as appropriate, the MAH) and the supplier (including blood and
       tissue establishments) should contain clear provisions about the transfer of
       information. In particular, this should include test results performed by the
       supplier, traceability data, and transmission of health donor information that may
       become available after the supply that may have an impact on the quality or
       safety of the ATMPs manufactured. National laws that are required as part of the
       donation and procurement of human blood and blood components,
       haematopoietic progenitor cells, human tissues and cells for manufacturing
       purposes need to be adhered to. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section
       5.28)

5.28   The quality requirements established by the manufacturer in the MA or CTA for
       materials classified as critical during QRM process (according to PRP profile)
       should be discussed and agreed with the suppliers during the product life cycle.
       Appropriate aspects of the production, testing and control, including handling,
       labelling, packaging and distribution requirements, complaints, recalls and
       rejection procedures should be documented in a formal quality agreement.
       (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section 5.28)




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -88-                            25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



Human Blood, Tissues and Cells Used as Starting Materials

5.29   The donation, procurement and testing of human blood, tissues and cells used
       as starting materials for ATMPs should be in accordance with the applicable
       national law.

       (a)   The procurement, donation and testing of blood, cells and tissues is
             regulated in some countries. Such supply sites must hold appropriate
             approvals from the Competent Authority(ies) which should be verified as
             part of supplier management.

       (b)   For cell therapies, the maintenance of the aseptic processing from time of
             procurement of cells through manufacturing and administration back into
             the patient should be ensured.

       (c)   Where such human cells or tissues are imported, they must meet
             equivalent national standards of quality and safety. The traceability and
             serious adverse reaction and serious adverse event notification
             requirements may be set out in national law.

       (d)   There may be some instances where processing of blood, tissues and cells
             used as starting materials for ATMPs will be conducted at blood or tissue
             establishments. This is permissible only if authorised by national law (e.g.
             the material would be otherwise compromised and processing involves only
             minimal manipulation).

       (e)   Blood, tissue and cells are released by the Responsible Person (RP) in the
             blood or tissue establishment before shipment to the ATMP manufacturer.
             After that, normal medicinal product starting material controls apply. The
             test results of all tissues / cells supplied by the tissue establishment should
             be available to the manufacturer of the medicinal product. Such information
             must be used to make appropriate material segregation and storage
             decisions. In cases where manufacturing must be initiated prior to receiving
             test results from the tissue establishment, tissue and cells may be shipped
             to the medicinal product manufacturer, provided controls are in place to
             prevent cross-contamination with tissue and cells that have been released
             by the RP in the tissue establishment.

       (f)   A technical agreement clearly defining the responsibilities should be in
             place between all involved parties (e.g. manufacturers, tissue
             establishment, sponsors, MAH).

       (g)   The transport of blood, tissues and cells to the manufacturing site must be
             controlled by a written agreement between the responsible parties. The
             manufacturing sites should have documentary evidence of adherence to
             the specified storage and transport conditions.

       (h)   Continuation of traceability requirements started at tissue establishments
             through to the recipient(s), and vice versa, including materials in contact
             with the cells or tissues should be maintained.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -89-                            25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



Seed Lot and Cell Bank System

5.30   A system of master and working virus seed lots and/or cell banks is
       recommended if the production of allogeneic ATMP involves cell culture or
       propagation in embryos and animals. This can prevent the unwanted drift of
       properties, which might ensue from repeated subcultures or multiple generations.

5.31   The number of generations (doublings, passages) between the seed lot or cell
       bank, the active substance and finished product should be consistent with
       specifications in the MA or CTA.

5.32   As part of product lifecycle management, establishment of seed lots and cell
       banks, including master and working generations, as well as maintenance and
       storage, should be performed under appropriate GMP conditions. This should
       include an appropriately controlled environment to protect the seed lot and the
       cell bank and the personnel handling it. During the establishment of the seed lot
       and cell bank, no other living or infectious material (e.g. virus, cell lines or cell
       strains) should be handled simultaneously in the same area or by the same
       persons. For all stages prior to the establishment of the master seed or cell bank
       generation, principles of GMP may be applied. For all pre-master bank stages,
       documentation should be available to support traceability. All issues related to
       components used during the development with potential impact on product safety
       (e.g. reagents of biological origin) from initial sourcing and genetic development
       should be documented.

5.33   Following the establishment of master and working cell banks and master and
       working seed lots, quarantine and release procedures should be followed. This
       should include adequate characterisation and testing for contaminants. Their
       on-going suitability for use should be further demonstrated by the consistency of
       the characteristics and quality of the successive batches of product. Evidence of
       the stability and recovery of the seeds and banks should be documented and
       records should be kept in a manner permitting trend evaluation.

5.34   Seed lots and cell banks should be stored and used in such a way as to minimise
       the risks of contamination (e.g. stored in the vapour phase of liquid nitrogen in
       sealed containers) or alteration. Control measures for the storage of different
       seeds and/or cells in the same area or equipment should prevent mix-up and take
       into account the infectious nature of the materials to prevent cross-contamination.

5.35   Cell based ATMPs are often generated from a cell stock obtained from limited
       number of passages. In contrast with the two-tiered system of Master and
       Working cell banks, the number of production runs from a cell stock is limited by
       the number of aliquots obtained after expansion and does not cover the entire life
       cycle of the product. Cell stock changes should be addressed in the MA/CTA and
       thereby covered by a validation and comparability protocol, as the inter-donor
       variability may change the product.

5.36   Storage containers should be sealed, clearly labelled and kept at an appropriate
       temperature. A stock inventory must be kept. The storage temperature and,
       where used, the liquid nitrogen levels should be continuously monitored.
       Deviation from set limits and corrective and preventive action taken should be
       recorded.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -90-                            25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



5.37   It is desirable to split stocks and to store the split stocks at different locations to
       minimise the risks of total loss. The controls at such locations should provide the
       assurances outlined in the preceding paragraphs.

5.38   The storage and handling conditions for stocks should be managed according to
       the same procedures and parameters. Once containers are removed from the
       seed lot / cell bank management system, the containers should not be returned
       to stock.

CHAPTER 6 QUALITY CONTROL
6.1    In-process controls have a greater importance in ensuring the consistency of the
       quality of ATMPs than for conventional products. In-process control testing
       should be performed at appropriate stages of production to control those
       conditions that are important for the quality of the finished product.

General

6.2    The head of quality control is responsible for control of ATMP active substances,
       starting materials, raw materials and other materials such as primary packaging
       materials and any other material in direct contact with the product during
       manufacture as well as medical devices that are used in combined ATMPs.
       Further, the head of quality control is responsible to control the quality of the
       ATMP throughout all stages of manufacture. In case of autologous products or
       allogeneic products in a donor-matched scenario, the match between the origin
       of the starting material and the recipient should be verified.

6.3    Samples should be representative of the batch of materials or products from
       which they are taken. Other samples may also be taken to monitor the worst-case
       part of a process (e.g. beginning or end of a process). The sampling plan used
       should be appropriately justified and based on a risk management approach.
       Certain types of cells (e.g. autologous cells used in ATMPs) may be available in
       limited quantities and, where allowed in the CTA or MA, a modified testing and
       sample retention strategy may be developed and documented. (Replaces PIC/S
       GMP Guide Part I Section 6.12)

6.4    Sample containers should bear a label indicating the contents, with the batch
       number, the date of sampling and the containers from which samples have been
       drawn. They should be managed in a manner to minimize the risk of mix-up and
       to protect the samples from adverse storage conditions. When containers are too
       small, the use of a qualified bar code or other means that permit access to this
       information should be considered. (Replaces PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Section
       6.13)

6.5    In line with requirements of Annex 19, a reference sample of a batch of starting
       material, raw materials, packaging material and finished product should be
       drawn. As a general principle, a reference sample should be of sufficient size to
       permit the carrying out on at least two occasions of the full analytical controls on
       the batch foreseen in the CTA or MA. In case of a continuous process, where the
       ATMP active substance will immediately be turned into the ATMP drug product,
       only a reference sample of the ATMP drug product needs to be drawn. However,
       it is acknowledged that drawing reference samples may not always be feasible



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -91-                             25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



      due to scarcity of the materials or limited size of the batches (e.g. autologous
      products, allogeneic products in a matched donor scenario, products for ultra-
      rare diseases, and products for use in first-in-man clinical trials with a very small-
      scale production). In these cases, alternative approaches should be justified and
      authorised in the corresponding CTA/MA.

6.6   Samples of the starting materials should generally be kept for two years after the
      batch release. However, it is acknowledged that the retention of samples may be
      challenging due to scarcity of the materials. Due to this intrinsic limitation, it is
      justified not to keep reference samples of the cells/tissues used as starting
      materials in the case of autologous ATMPs and certain allogeneic ATMPs (i.e.
      matched donor scenario). In other cases, where the scarcity of the materials is
      also a concern, the sampling strategy may be adapted based on risk assessment
      and appropriately implemented mitigation measures. For cases where the
      starting material is an established cell bank system, there is no need to keep cell
      bank vials specifically for the purpose of reference samples.

6.7   In line with requirements of Annex 19, a sample of a fully packaged unit (retention
      sample) should be kept per batch for at least one year after the expiry date
      (national requirements might differ). A retention sample is, however, not expected
      in the case of autologous products or allogeneic products, where justified (e.g. in
      a matched donor scenario), as the unit produced with the patient’s tissues/cells
      constitutes what should be administered to the patient. When it is not possible to
      keep a retention sample, photographs or copies of the label are acceptable for
      inclusion in the batch records.

6.8   Shorter retention periods as mentioned in Section 6.6 and 6.7 might be justified
      based on the stability and shelf life of the product. In cases of short shelf life, the
      manufacturer should consider if the retention of the sample under conditions that
      prolong the shelf life (such as cryopreservation) is representative for the intended
      purpose. For instance, cryopreservation of fresh-cells may render the sample
      inadequate for characterisation purposes but the sample may be adequate for
      sterility or viral safety controls (the volume of the samples can be reduced
      according to the intended purpose). When cryostorage of a sample is considered
      inadequate for the intended purpose, the manufacturer should consider
      alternative approaches that are scientifically justified.

On-going stability programme

6.9   The protocol for the on-going stability programme can be different from that of the
      initial long term stability study as submitted in the MA dossier provided that this
      is justified and documented in the protocol (e.g. the frequency of testing, or when
      updating to ICH/VICH recommendations). Stability studies on the reconstituted
      and thawed product are performed during product development and need not be
      monitored on an on-going basis. The use of surrogate materials (i.e. material
      derived from healthy volunteers) or alternative scientifically sounds approaches
      are acceptable in case of autologous products (or matched donor scenario)
      where the entire batch needs to be administered to the patient. (Replaces PIC/S
      GMP Guide Part I Section 6.31)




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -92-                             25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



Release

6.10   In general, batches of ATMPs should only be released for sale or supply to the
       market after certification by an Authorised Person. The batch release
       specifications are not limited to analytical results (also refer to out of specification
       (OOS) results). In line with PIC/S GMP Guide Part I Sections 1.4 (xv), 2.6. and
       6.34 the Authorised Person should assess the quality of each batch considering
       processing records, results from environmental monitoring, monitoring of process
       parameters, analytical results and all deviations from standard procedures and
       protocols. Until a batch is certified, it should remain at the site of manufacture or
       be shipped under quarantine to another site, which has been approved for that
       purpose by the relevant Competent Authority (if applicable) and is controlled
       appropriately within the manufacturer’s quality system. Generally, a finished
       product that does not meet release specifications should not be administered to
       a patient unless otherwise justified.

6.11   Where authorised by national law, the administration of a product that does not
       meet the release specification might be performed under exceptional
       circumstances (such as when there is no alternative treatment available that
       would provide the same therapeutic outcome and the administration of the failed
       products could be lifesaving).

6.12   In cases, referred to in point 6.11, where product does not meet release
       specification, the responsibility and the decision of the patient treatment are solely
       of the treating physician and are beyond the remit of this PIC/S annex. The
       Authorised Person, the MAH and/or the Sponsor of the clinical trial should
       consider the following in making the product available:

       The treating physician should provide in writing a rationale and/or request to the
       Authorised Person and MAH.

       (a) Batch manufacturing records and documentation provided to the treating
           physician should clearly state that the batch has failed the release
           specifications and describe the parameters that have not been met.

       (b) When responding to a treating physician’s request, the MAH should provide
           its evaluation of the risks of product administration. However, it is solely the
           physician’s decision to administer the finished product that does not meet
           release specifications.

       (c) The Authorised Person (or delegate) should report the supply of the product
           to the relevant Competent Authorities, on behalf of the MAH in accordance
           with their legal obligations.

6.13   The clinical trial Sponsor or MAH should have procedures in place that describe
       steps to be taken if product does not meet release specification but may be
       released to permit treatment. Individual instances that do not meet release
       specifications may be addressed through lot-by-lot release programmes and
       specific case-by-case, risk-based assessments, where such programs exist
       within national law.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -93-                            25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



6.14   For ATMPs with a short shelf life, where established analytical tests might not
       permit batch certification prior to product administration, alternative methods of
       obtaining equivalent data should be considered (e.g. rapid microbiological
       methods).

       Subject to approval from the Competent Authority, batch certification of short
       shelf life products performed prior to completion of all product quality control is
       permitted when the testing timelines would not allow for effective distribution to a
       patient.

       (a) A suitable control strategy must be in place, built on enhanced understanding
           of the product and process performance. This must take into account the
           controls and attributes of starting materials, raw materials and intermediates.

       (b) The procedure for batch certification should provide an exact and detailed
           description of the entire release procedure, including responsibilities of the
           different personnel involved in assessment of production and analytical data.

       (c) The procedure for batch certification and release of short shelf life ATMP
           may be carried out in two or more stages:

            i.    Assessment by designated person(s) of batch processing records,
                  results from environmental monitoring (where available) which should
                  cover production conditions, all deviations from standard procedures
                  and protocols as well as the available analytical results for review in
                  preparation for the initial certification by the Authorised Person.

            ii.   Assessment of the final analytical tests and other information available
                  for final certification by the Authorised Person. A procedure should be
                  in place to describe the measures to be taken (including liaison with
                  clinical staff) where out of specification test results are obtained. Such
                  events should be fully investigated and the relevant corrective and
                  preventive actions taken to prevent recurrence.

       (d) Increased reliance on process validation should be considered as supporting
           data for batch release in absence of a complete analytical results panel, even
           in case of investigational ATMP.

       (e) A continuous assessment of the effectiveness of the pharmaceutical quality
           system must be in place. This includes the records being kept in a manner,
           which permits trend evaluation.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -94-                           25 August 2023
        Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



Batch release process in cases of decentralised / point of care
manufacturing

6.15    In the exceptional circumstances where approved by the Competent Authority
        and in accordance with CTA or MA or other national requirements, manufacturing
        of the ATMP may take place in sites close to the patient (e.g. ATMPs with short
        shelf life, clinical advantage of using fresh cells as opposed to freezing the
        starting materials/finished product, advantages of using automated equipment,
        etc.). This includes manufacturing models where partial manufacturing occurs at
        a central site and finishing occurs at a local site. It also includes manufacturing
        models where there are no steps occurring at a central site and the active
        substance is provided to a number of local sites where full manufacture occurs.
        In such cases, steps in the manufacturing of the ATMPs may occur in multiple
        sites that may be also located in treatment centres (point of care) including
        hospitals. National law might require GMP-manufacturing authorisations and/ or
        authorisations for the procurement and/or manufacture of blood, cells and tissues
        intended to be used for ATMP manufacturing at the central site and the satellite
        sites.

6.16    The batch certification and release process becomes particularly important in the
        case of ATMPs manufactured under a decentralised system as manufacturing in
        multiple sites increases the risk of variability for the product. In particular, through
        the batch certification and release process it must be ensured that each batch
        released at any of the sites has been manufactured and quality controlled in
        accordance with the requirements of the CTA or MA and other relevant regulatory
        requirements including compliance with GMP. The steps of the batch certification
        and release process should be clearly documented in a standard operating
        procedure (SOP). The following conditions need to be respected:

       (a) A "responsible site", should be identified. The responsible site is responsible
           for the oversight of the decentralised sites. During the product life cycle, the
           responsible site:

              i.   must have availability of an Authorised Person;

              ii. must ensure that those involved in the batch certification and release
                  process are adequately qualified and trained for their tasks;

              iii. should perform audits to confirm compliance with the batch certification
                   and release process (as descripted in SOP);

              iv. must ensure that there is a written contract/technical agreement
                  between the responsible site and the decentralised sites establishing
                  the responsibilities of each party, and

              v. must ensure that there are written arrangements to:

                    timely report quality defects, deviations or non-conformity to the
                     central site;

                    ensure deviations are investigated to identify root cause(s) and
                     implement corrective and preventive measures as appropriate; and



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                          -95-                            25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use




                  ensure deviations are approved by a delegated person (after having
                   assessed the impact on quality, safety and efficacy), with the
                   involvement of the Authorised Person as appropriate.
       (b) The Authorised Person should have ultimate responsibility for the batch
           certification (responsibility cannot be delegated). However, it should be
           possible for the Authorised Person of the responsible site to rely on
           data/information that is transmitted to the Authorised Person by qualified and
           trained personnel at the decentralised sites.
          When permitted by national law, the Authorised Person may delegate release
          to trained and qualified personnel at the decentralised site to act under the
          direction of the Authorised Person for exceptional situations (e.g. life
          threatening cases or off-hours). The following conditions apply:

            i.   There is a detailed algorithm that determines the cases when the
                 product can be released at the local site without the preliminary
                 approval of the Authorised Person, including deviations that do not
                 require the intervention of the Authorised Person. If technology permits
                 this step can be performed by a validated computer system.

            ii. The Authorised Person reviews all releases that have occurred at a
                decentralised site within an appropriately justified timeframe to confirm
                the adequacy of the releases including:

                  determining that the local sites can continue release;

                  if any product needs to be recalled or a product alert needs to be
                   issued (see recall section in Chapter 8);

                  if any provision in the release procedure and /or technical
                   agreement needs modification; and

                  the product has not been released without Authorised Person
                   authorisation when required.

CHAPTER 7 OUTSOURCED ACTIVITIES

OTHERS

7.1   Collection of starting materials and highly specialised testing in the jurisdictions
      that are subject to licensing (e.g. karyotype testing, exome sequencing) can be
      outsourced to non GMP licensed third party, as allowed by national law, provided:

      (a) there is a rationale and a justification in the quality system;

      (b) the contract giver takes responsibility to ensure that the contract acceptor
          demonstrates an appropriate level of GMP commensurate to the risk to the
          product and the activities performed using the principles of Annex 20; and




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -96-                              25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



      (c) that proportionate qualifications/validations as appropriate are conducted
          (with reference to Annex 15 and Annex 20) to demonstrate that the activities
          are not detrimental to the quality of the product manufactured.

CHAPTER 8 COMPLAINTS AND PRODUCT RECALL
PRODUCT RECALLS AND OTHER POTENTIAL RISK-REDUCING ACTIONS

8.1   If additional donor (human or animal) health information becomes available after
      procurement, which affects product quality, a ‘look-back’ procedure needs to be
      initiated. This involves an analysis of the risk(s) and of the need for corrective or
      preventive measures.

8.2   In addition to recalls, other risk-reducing actions may be considered to manage
      the risks presented by quality defects, such as the transmission of appropriate
      information to healthcare professionals which may be important for:

      (a) a single batch product (e.g. autologous ATMP where the entire batch has
          been administered), or

      (b) products where patient treatment interruption presents a higher risk than
          continued use of the recalled product.

      In such cases, the MAH/manufacturer needs to provide information to the treating
      physician and to the Competent Authority. Quality defect notifications,
      pharmacovigilance signals and other notifications should also be sent as set in
      national law.

      (Replaces PICS GMP Guide Part I Section 8.31)

8.3   In order to test the robustness of the recall procedure (or healthcare professional
      notification) consideration should be given to performing mock recall or mock
      transmission of appropriate information to healthcare professionals. Such
      evaluations should extend to both within office-hour situations as well as out-of-
      office hour situations.

      The frequency of the mock recall (or mock transmission of appropriate
      information to healthcare professionals) should be justified by the manufacturer
      considering factors such as the stage of the product development and the
      complexity of the supply. For authorised products, a yearly frequency is
      recommended unless otherwise justified.

      (Replaces PICS GMP Guide Part I Section 8.30)




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -97-                            25 August 2023
          Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



PART B: SPECIFIC GUIDANCE ON SELECTED PRODUCT TYPES
B1. ANIMAL SOURCED PRODUCTS

This guidance applies to animal materials, which includes materials from establishments
such as abattoirs. Since the supply chains can be extensive and complex, controls based
on QRM principles need to be applied, see also requirements of appropriate
pharmacopoeial monographs, including the need for specific tests at defined stages.
Documentation to demonstrate the supply chain traceability5 and clear roles of
participants in the supply chain, typically including a sufficiently detailed and current
process map, should be in place.

B 1.1 Monitoring programmes should be in place for animal disease that is of concern
      to human health. Organisations should take into account reports from trustworthy
      sources on national disease prevalence when compiling their assessment of risk
      and mitigation factors. Such organisations include the World Organisation for
      Animal Health (OIE, Office International des Epizooties). This should be
      supplemented by information on health monitoring and control programme(s) at
      national and local levels, the latter to include the sources (e.g. farm or feedlot)
      from which the animals are drawn and the control measures in place during
      transport to the abattoirs.

B 1.2 Control measures for starting and raw materials at establishments such as
      abattoirs should include appropriate elements of a Quality Management System
      to assure a satisfactory level of operator training, materials traceability, control
      and consistency. These measures may be drawn from sources outside PIC/S
      GMP but should be shown to provide equivalent levels of control. Xenogeneic
      starting material should comply with other national laws.

B 1.3 Control measures for starting or raw materials should be in place, which prevent
      interventions, which may affect the quality of materials, or which at least provides
      evidence of such activities, during their progression through the manufacturing
      and supply chain. This includes the movement of material between sites of initial
      collection, partial and final purification(s), storage sites, hubs, consolidators and
      brokers. Details of such arrangements should be recorded within the traceability
      system and any breaches recorded, investigated and actions taken.

B 1.4 Regular audits of the starting or raw material supplier should be undertaken which
      verify compliance with controls for materials at the different stages of
      manufacture. Issues must be investigated to a depth appropriate to their
      significance, for which full documentation should be available. Systems should
      also be in place to ensure that effective corrective and preventive actions are
      taken.

B 1.5 Cells, tissues and organs intended for the manufacture of xenogeneic cell based
      medicinal products should be obtained only from animals that have been bred in
      captivity (barrier facility) specifically for this purpose and under no circumstances
      should cells, tissues and organs from wild animals or from abattoirs be used.
      Tissues of founder animals similarly should not be used. The health status of the
      animals should be monitored and documented.




5         See PIC/S GMP Chapter 5


    PE 009-17 (Annexes)                    -98-                           25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



B2. GENE THERAPY MEDICINAL PRODUCTS (GTMPs)

There are several types of gene therapy products. Synthetic GTMPs are within the scope
of the guidance in this section. For cell-based gene therapy products, some aspects of
the guidance in Section B3 may also be applicable.

B2.1   The manufacture and testing of GTMPs raises specific issues regarding the
       safety and quality of the final product and safety issues for recipients and staff. A
       risk based approach for operator, environment and patient safety and the
       implementation of controls based on the biological hazard class should be
       applied. National requirements and, if applicable, international safety measures
       should be applied.

B2.2   A description of the production of viral and non-viral vectors, nucleic acids (e.g.
       plasmids, linear DNA, mRNA, siRNA) and genetically modified cells should be
       available in sufficient detail to ensure the traceability of the products from the
       starting material (plasmids, gene of interest and regulatory sequences, cell
       banks, and viral or non-viral vector stock) to the finished product.

B2.3   The following considerations apply to the ex-vivo gene transfer to recipient cells:
       (a)   Traceability requirements must be maintained. (refer to Section 4.3 to 4.8)
       (b)   There should be a clear batch definition, from cell source to final product
             container(s). (refer Section 4.2)
       (c)   For products that utilise non-biological means to deliver the gene, their
             physico-chemical properties should be documented and tested.
       (d)   Although the vector used for the manipulation of the cell will not be part of
             the final product, all early processes (e.g. design to construction to
             manufacturing of the plasmid, as well as establishment of cell banks) in the
             manufacture of viral vectors are considered critical and their quality needs
             to be under control. In the case that due to national requirements the
             manufacture of viral vectors are not required under full GMP sufficient
             quality standards (“principles of GMP”) should be applied in their
             manufacture.

Manufacture of Viral Vectors and Plasmids under “principles of GMP”

B2.4   Annex 2A and elements of Part II of the PIC/S GMP Guide can be considered for
       the manufacturing of viral vectors and plasmids where appropriate (refer to the
       examples in light grey in Table 1).

       Manufacturers of viral vectors and plasmids should have a quality management
       system in place that allows them to apply sections of the guideline most relevant
       to ensure the quality of the starting materials having regard to the relevant risks
       for the quality, safety and efficacy of the finished product.

B2.5   The ATMP manufacturer is responsible for appropriate quality of the viral vectors
       and plasmids used as starting materials. Special attention should be given to
       requirements described in section 5.23 to 5.28 of this guideline.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -99-                            25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



       (a) The ATMP manufacturer should follow national requirements and apply QRM
           considering the risk presented by the vector to the safety and quality of the
           ATMP to justify which sections of Annex 2A and elements of Part II of the
           PIC/S GMP Guide are applicable for manufacture and testing of viral vectors
           and plasmids. A defined and controlled manufacturing process should be
           implemented as a result.

       (b) Sufficient quality standards should be applied for the manufacture of
           plasmids used for the establishment of vectors or early stages of mRNA
           GTMPs (refer to Table 1). The design through to construction of the nucleic
           acid (plasmid) preparation by molecular biological and in silico methods is
           considered under the scope of research and development and therefore not
           part of the respective Annex.

       (c) Relevant provisions in Annex 1 are also applicable. The manufacturer should
           justify the applicability extent using QRM. In general, products that can be
           sterile filtered should follow the relevant sections in the Annex 1, otherwise
           aseptic manufacturing provisions should be followed.

B2.6   If the manufacturing of the vectors is outsourced, the ATMP manufacturer should
       assess the risk presented by the vector to the quality and safety of the ATMP and
       thereby select a suitable vector supplier that is able to comply with the GMP
       standards required by national legislation.

       The appropriate sections of Annex 2A and elements of Part II of the PIC/S GMP
       Guide relevant for the specific product should be determined in the agreement
       between the ATMP manufacturer and the vector manufacturer and cover relevant
       aspects (e.g. quality management, documentation, raw materials, cell banks,
       production, testing and control, storage, and other aspects of handling and
       distribution, as appropriate). In addition the vector manufacturer should be part
       of the ATMP manufacturer’s vendor qualification programme. The level of
       supervision and further testing by the ATMP manufacturer should be
       proportionate to the risks posed by the individual materials.

B3     SOMATIC HUMAN AND XENOGENEIC CELL THERAPY PRODUCTS
       AND TISSUE ENGINEERED PRODUCTS AND COMBINED ATMPs

For genetically modified cell-based products that are not classified as GTMPs, some
aspects of guidance in Section B2 may be applicable.

B3.1   In the manufacture of such products involving human or xenogeneic cells
       special attention should be given to traceability requirements (refer to Section
       4.3 to 4.8) and definition of a batch (refer to Section 4.2).
B3.2   Authorised sources of cellular products, bio-molecules, bio-materials,
       scaffolds, matrices, and other substances that are licensed medicinal
       products or medical devices should be used where available.
B3.3   During the life cycle of the product where devices, including custom-made
       devices, are incorporated as part of the product, an appropriate Quality
       Agreement should be made between manufacturer and device suppliers to
       assure consistent quality of the device.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -100-                           25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



COMMON GLOSSARY TO ANNEX 2A AND 2B
The Glossary in the main GMP Guide applies also to Annex 2A & B. Entries in this
common glossary are only included where the terms are used in Annex 2A & B and
require further explanation. Definitions, which already exist, have been deemed
appropriate.

ATMP Active substance
The active substance of a product is defined in the relevant CTA or MA authorisation
dossier. The ATMP active substance is regarded equivalent to an API.

Adjuvant
A chemical or biological substance that enhances the immune response against an
antigen.

Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products (ATMP)
ATMP means any of the following medicinal products for human use:

   (a) Gene therapy medicinal product (GTMP):

       ‘GTMP’ means a biological medicinal product, which has the following
       characteristics:

           i.     It contains an active substance, which contains or consists of a
                  recombinant nucleic acid used in or administered to human beings with
                  a view to regulating, repairing, replacing, adding or deleting a genetic
                  sequence;

           ii.    Its therapeutic, prophylactic or diagnostic effect relates directly to the
                  recombinant nucleic acid sequence it contains, or to the product of
                  genetic expression of this sequence.

       Normally GTMPs shall not include vaccines against infectious diseases which
       would be regulated as per Annex 2B. However, the Competent Authority can
       make a determination that should follow Annex 2A when this is beneficial and
       appropriate (e.g. mRNA vaccines that are manufactured using the same
       platform).

   (b) Somatic cell therapy medicinal product:

       ‘Somatic cell therapy medicinal product’ means a biological medicinal product,
       which has the following characteristics:

           i.     contains or consists of cells or tissues that have been subject to
                  substantial manipulation so that biological characteristics, physiological
                  functions or structural properties relevant for the intended clinical use
                  have been altered, or of cells or tissues that are not intended to be used
                  for the same essential function(s) in the recipient and the donor;

            ii.   is presented as having properties for, or is used in or administered to
                  human beings with a view to treating, preventing or diagnosing a




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -101-                           25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



                  disease through the pharmacological, immunological or metabolic
                  action of its cells or tissues.

   (c) Tissue engineered product:

       ‘Tissue engineered product’ means a product that:

            i.    contains or consists of engineered cells or tissues, and

            ii.   is presented as having properties for, or is used in or administered to
                  human beings with a view to regenerating, repairing or replacing a
                  human tissue.

       A tissue-engineered product may contain cells or tissues of human or animal
       origin, or both. The cells or tissues may be viable or non-viable. It may also
       contain additional substances, such as cellular products, bio-molecules,
       biomaterials, chemical substances, scaffolds or matrices. Products containing or
       consisting exclusively of non-viable human or animal cells and/or tissues, which
       do not contain any viable cells or tissues and which do not act principally by
       pharmacological, immunological or metabolic action, shall be excluded from this
       definition.

       Cells or tissues shall be considered ‘engineered’ if they fulfil at least one of the
       following conditions:

            i.    the cells or tissues have been subject to substantial manipulation, so
                  that biological characteristics, physiological functions or structural
                  properties relevant for the intended regeneration, repair or replacement
                  are achieved; or

            ii.   the cells or tissues are not intended to be used for the same essential
                  function or functions in the recipient as in the donor.

   (d) Combined ATMPs:

       ‘Combined ATMP’ means an advanced therapy medicinal product that fulfils the
       following conditions:

            i.    it must incorporate, as an integral part of the product, one or more
                  medical devices or one or more active implantable medical devices, and
            ii.   its cellular or tissue part must contain viable cells or tissues or its cellular
                  or tissue part containing non-viable cells or tissues must be liable to act
                  upon the human body with action that can be considered as primary to
                  that of the devices referred to.

   (e) A product that is classified or determined to be an ATMP by the PIC/S
       participating authority in its own jurisdiction according to national law.

Allergoids
Allergens, which are chemically modified to reduce IgE reactivity.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -102-                              25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



Antibody
Proteins produced by the B-lymphocytes that bind to specific antigens. Antibodies may
be divided into 2 main types based on key differences in their method of manufacture.

       Monoclonal antibodies (MAb)
       Homogenous antibody population obtained from a single clone of lymphocytes or
       by recombinant technology and which bind to a single epitope.

       Polyclonal antibodies
       Derived from a range of lymphocyte clones, produced in human and animals in
       response to the epitopes on most ‘non-self’ molecules

Antigens
Substances (e.g. toxins, foreign proteins, bacteria, tissue cells) capable of inducing
specific immune responses.

Area
A specific set of rooms within a building associated with the manufacturing of any one
product or multiple products that has a common air-handling unit.

Authorised Person
Person recognised by the authority as having the necessary basic scientific and technical
background and experience.

Note: For expanded clarity beyond the definition in the PIC/S GMP Guide, the Authorised
Person performs certification of batches in line with MA/CTA. After certification, the
batches of medicinal products can be released for sale or supply to the market. The
Authorised Person has the overall responsibility for release of the products.

Bioburden
The level and type (i.e. objectionable or not) of micro-organism present in raw materials,
media, biological substances, intermediates or products. Regarded as contamination
when the level and/or type exceed specifications.


Biological medicinal product
A biological medicinal product is a product, of which the active substance is a biological
substance. A biological substance is a substance that is produced by or extracted from
a biological source and that needs for its characterisation and the determination of its
quality a combination of physico-chemical-biological testing, together with the production
process and its control.

Biosafety level (BSL)
The containment conditions required to safely handle organisms of different hazards
ranging from BSL1 (lowest risk, unlikely to cause human disease) to BSL4 (highest risk,
cause severe disease, likely to spread and no effective prophylaxis or treatment
available).

Campaign manufacture
The manufacture of a series of batches of the same product in sequence in a given
period of time followed by strict adherence to accepted control measures before
transfer to another product. The products are not run at the same time but may be run
on the same equipment.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -103-                           25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



Closed system
Where an active substance or product is not exposed to the immediate room
environment during manufacture.

Contained use
An operation, in which genetically modified organisms are cultured, stored, used,
transported, destroyed or disposed of and for which barriers (physical / chemical /
biological) are used to limit their contact with the general population and the environment.

Critical Process Parameter (CPP)
A process parameter whose variability has an impact on a CQA and therefore should be
monitored or controlled to ensure the process produces the desired quality. (ICH Q8R2)

Critical Quality Attribute (CQA)
A physical, chemical, biological, or microbiological property or characteristic that should
be within an appropriate limit, range, or distribution to ensure the desired product quality.
(ICH Q8R2)

Ex-vivo
Where procedures are conducted on tissues or cells outside the living body and returned
to the living body.

Feeder cells
Cells used in co-culture to maintain pluripotent stem cells. For human embryonic stem
cell culture, typical feeder layers include mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) or human
embryonic fibroblasts that have been treated to prevent them from dividing.

Fermenter
In case of (mammalian) cell lines, the term fermenter should be understood as
bioreactor.

Gene
A sequence of DNA that codes for one (or more) protein(s).

Gene transfer
A process to transfer a gene in cells, involving an expression system contained in a
delivery system known as a vector, which can be of viral, as well as non-viral origin. After
gene transfer, genetically modified cells are also termed transduced cells.

Genetically modified organism (GMO)
An organism, with the exception of human beings, in which the genetic material has been
altered in a way that does not occur naturally by mating and/or natural recombination.
For the purpose of this annex, GMO is intended to cover mutations that are not occurring
because of a natural event but are generated by human intervention.

Hapten
A low molecular weight molecule that is not in itself antigenic unless conjugated to a
‘carrier’ molecule.

Hybridoma
An immortalised cell line that secrete desired (monoclonal) antibodies and are typically
derived by fusing B-lymphocytes with tumour cells.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -104-                            25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



In-vivo
Procedures conducted in living organisms.

Look-back
Documented procedure to trace ATMPs active substances or products, which may be
adversely affected by the use or incorporation of animal or human materials either when
such materials fail release tests due to the presence of contaminating agent or when
conditions of concern become apparent in the source animal or human.

Master cell bank (MCB)
An aliquot of a single pool of cells, which generally has been prepared from the selected
cell clone under defined conditions, dispensed into multiple containers and stored under
defined conditions. The MCB is used to derive all working cell banks.

Master transgenic bank
As above but for transgenic plants or animals.

Master virus seed (MVS)
As above, but in relation to viruses.

Material directly in contact with the ATMP during manufacture and storage
Non exhaustive example list: Processing containers (e.g. fermenters, cell culture flasks
and plates, blood bag systems, single use equipment used in automated manufacturing
platforms, beads for separation techniques, chromatographic column material), cryo-
containers for storage and primary packaging material.

Monosepsis (axenic)
A single organism in culture, which is not contaminated with any other.

Multi-product facility
A facility that manufactures, concurrently or in campaign mode, a range of different
ATMPs active substances and products and within which equipment train either may or
may not be dedicated to specific substances or products.

Plasmid
A plasmid is a piece of DNA usually present in a bacterial cell as a circular entity
separated from the cell chromosome; it can be modified by molecular biology techniques,
purified out of the bacterial cell and used to transfer its DNA to another cell.

Primary cell lot
A pool of primary cells minimally expanded to attain a sufficient number for a limited
number of applications.

Principles of GMP:
The Annex 2A in conjunction with PIC/S GMP guidelines and annexes describes the
manufacture of ATMP active substances and ATMP drug products. However, aspects of
these guidelines are also relevant for early stages in the ATMP manufacture (e.g.
manufcatur of viral vectors, plasmids) where full GMP is not required under national
legislation. As a result, the ATMP manufacturer should make sure that all relevant GMP
aspects for the manufacturing of those materials are implemented that ensure process
control and consistency, investigation of anomalies and control of change.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -105-                           25 August 2023
       Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use



Processing aids
Substance used in the manufacture of the active substance and medicinal product, which
may be present in the finished product e.g. anti-foaming agents, puffer and media
additives (salts, pH indicators), enzymes not considered under raw materials

Quality Target Product Profile (QTPP)
A prospective summary of the quality characteristics of a drug product that ideally will be
achieved to ensure the desired quality, taking into account safety and efficacy of the drug
product. (ICHQ8R2)

Raw materials
All materials that come in direct contact with the product during the manufacturing
process but are not necessarily part of the final formulation (e.g. cryoprotectants, feeder
cells, reagents, culture media, buffers, serum, enzymes, cytokines, and growth factors).

Responsible Person (RP) for blood or tissue establishment
This term is equivalent to the EU term “Responsible Person”. The RP is responsible for
the release of the starting material to the ATMP manufacturer. Blood or tissue
establishment: this term is equivalent to the EU term and for the purpose of this annex
is the facility that is authorised according to national law to perform processing (minimal
manipulation) of the starting material of human origin.

Scaffold
A support, delivery vehicle or matrix that may provide structure for or facilitate the
migration, binding or transport of cells and/or bioactive molecules.

Somatic cells
Cells, other than reproductive (germ line) cells, which make up the body of a human or
animal. These cells may be autologous (from the patient), allogeneic (from another
human being) or xenogeneic (from animals) somatic living cells, that have been
manipulated or altered ex vivo, to be administered in humans to obtain a therapeutic,
diagnostic or preventive effect.

Specified pathogen free (SPF)
Animal materials (e.g. chickens, embryos or cell cultures) used for the production or
quality control of biological medicinal products derived from groups (e.g. flocks or herds)
of animals free from specified pathogens (SPF). Such flocks or herds are defined as
animals sharing a common environment and having their own caretakers who have no
contact with non-SPF groups.

Transgenic
An organism that contains a foreign gene in its normal genetic component for the
expression of biological pharmaceutical materials.

Vector
An agent of transmission, which transmits genetic information from one cell or organism
to another, e.g. plasmids, liposomes, viruses.

Viral vector
A vector derived from a virus and modified by means of molecular biology techniques in
a way as to retain some, but not all, the parental virus genes; if the genes responsible
for virus replication capacity are deleted, the vector is made replication-incompetent.

Viral Vector replication incompetent / devoid
No ability of the vector to replicate.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -106-                          25 August 2023
        Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use




Viral Vector replication limited / defective / conditional replication
A constrained ability to replicate where the intent is for the vector may be to target a
particular tissue or target cell type with a planned integration required for clinical efficacy
of the gene therapy.

Working cell bank (WCB)
A homogeneous pool of cells preferably derived from a MCB, which are distributed
uniformly into a number of containers, stored in such a way to ensure stability and
intended for use in production.

Working transgenic bank (WTB)
As above but for transgenic plants or animals.

Working virus seed (WVS)
As above but in relation to viruses.

Zoonosis (zoonotic)
Animal diseases that can be transmitted to humans.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -107-                             25 August 2023
Annex 2B Manufacture of biological medicinal substances and products for human use
