ANNEX 1


MANUFACTURE OF STERILE MEDICINAL PRODUCTS


Document map

Section Number                  General overview

1.    Scope                     Includes additional areas (other than sterile products) where
                                the general principles of the annex can be applied.

2.    Principle                 General principles as applied to the manufacture of sterile
                                products.

3.    Pharmaceutical Quality    Highlights the specific requirements of the PQS when applied
      System (PQS)              to sterile products.

4.    Premises                  General guidance regarding the specific needs for premises
                                design and also guidance on the qualification of premises
                                including the use of Barrier Technology.

5.    Equipment                 General guidance on the design and operation of equipment.

6.    Utilities                 Guidance regarding the special requirements of utilities such
                                as water, gas and vacuum.

7.    Personnel                 Guidance on the requirements for specific training, knowledge
                                and skills. Also gives guidance regarding the qualification of
                                personnel.

8.    Production and specific   Guidance on the approaches to be taken regarding aseptic
      technologies              and terminal sterilization processes. Guidance on the
                                approaches to sterilization of products, equipment and
                                packaging components. Also guidance on different
                                technologies such as lyophilization and Form-Fill-Seal where
                                specific requirements apply.

9.    Environmental and         This section differs from guidance given in section 4 in that the
      process monitoring        guidance here applies to ongoing routine monitoring regarding
                                the design of systems and setting of action limits alert levels
                                and reviewing trend data.
                                The section also gives guidance on the requirements of
                                Aseptic Process Simulations (APS).

10.   Quality control (QC)      Guidance on some of the specific Quality Control requirements
                                relating to sterile products.

11. Glossary                    Explanation of specific terminology.




PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -1-                               25 August 2023
                                    Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



1      Scope
       The manufacture of sterile products covers a wide range of sterile product types
       (active substance, excipient, primary packaging material and finished dosage
       form), packed sizes (single unit to multiple units), processes (from highly
       automated systems to manual processes) and technologies (e.g. biotechnology,
       classical small molecule manufacturing systems and closed systems). This
       Annex provides general guidance that should be used in the design and control
       of facilities, equipment, systems and procedures used for the manufacture of all
       sterile products applying the principles of Quality Risk Management (QRM), to
       ensure that microbial, particulate and endotoxin/pyrogen contamination is
       prevented in the final product.

       QRM applies to this document in its entirety and will not, normally, be referred to
       in specific paragraphs. Where specific limits or frequencies or ranges are
       specified, these should be considered as a minimum requirement. They are
       stated due to historical regulatory experience of issues that have been identified
       and have impacted the safety of patients.

       The intent of the Annex is to provide guidance for the manufacture of sterile
       products. However, some of the principles and guidance, such as contamination
       control strategy, design of premises, cleanroom classification, qualification,
       validation, monitoring and personnel gowning, may be used to support the
       manufacture of other products that are not intended to be sterile such as certain
       liquids, creams, ointments and low bioburden biological intermediates, but where
       the control and reduction of microbial, particulate and endotoxin/pyrogen
       contamination is considered important. Where a manufacturer elects to apply
       guidance herein to non-sterile products, the manufacturer should clearly
       document which principles have been applied and acknowledge that compliance
       with those principles should be demonstrated.


2      Principle
2.1    The manufacture of sterile products is subject to special requirements in order to
       minimize risks of microbial, particulate and endotoxin/pyrogen contamination.
       The following key areas should be considered:

       i.   Facility, equipment and process should be appropriately designed, qualified
            and/or validated and where applicable, subjected to ongoing verification
            according to the relevant sections of the Good Manufacturing Practices
            (GMP) guide. The use of appropriate technologies (e.g. Restricted Access
            Barriers Systems (RABS), isolators, robotic systems, rapid/alternative
            methods and continuous monitoring systems) should be considered to
            increase the protection of the product from potential extraneous sources of
            endotoxin/pyrogen, particulate and microbial contamination such as
            personnel, materials and the surrounding environment, and assist in the
            rapid detection of potential contaminants in the environment and the product.

      ii.   Personnel should have adequate qualifications and experience, training and
            behaviour with a specific focus on the principles involved in the protection of




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -2-                            25 August 2023
                                    Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



             sterile product during the manufacturing, packaging and distribution
             processes.

      iii.   Processes and monitoring systems for sterile product manufacture should be
             designed, commissioned, qualified, monitored and regularly reviewed by
             personnel with appropriate process, engineering and microbiological
             knowledge.

      iv.    Raw materials and packaging materials should be adequately controlled and
             tested to ensure that level of bioburden and endotoxin/pyrogen are suitable
             for use.

2.2    Processes, equipment, facilities and manufacturing activities should be managed
       in accordance with QRM principles to provide a proactive means of identifying,
       scientifically evaluating and controlling potential risks to quality. Where alternative
       approaches are used, these should be supported by appropriate rationale, risk
       assessment and mitigation, and should meet the intent of this Annex.

       In the first instance, QRM priorities should include appropriate design of the
       facility, equipment and processes, followed by the implementation of well-
       designed procedures, and finally application of monitoring systems as the
       element that demonstrates that the design and procedures have been correctly
       implemented and continue to perform in line with expectations. Monitoring or
       testing alone does not give assurance of sterility.

2.3    A Contamination Control Strategy (CCS) should be implemented across the
       facility in order to define all critical control points and assess the effectiveness of
       all the controls (design, procedural, technical and organisational) and monitoring
       measures employed to manage risks to medicinal product quality and safety. The
       combined strategy of the CCS should establish robust assurance of
       contamination prevention. The CCS should be actively reviewed and, where
       appropriate, updated and should drive continual improvement of the
       manufacturing and control methods. Its effectiveness should form part of the
       periodic management review. Where existing control systems are in place and
       are appropriately managed, these may not require replacement but should be
       referenced in the CCS and the associated interactions between systems should
       be understood.

2.4    Contamination control and steps taken to minimize the risk of contamination from
       microbial, endotoxin/pyrogen and particle sources includes a series of
       interrelated events and measures. These are typically assessed, controlled and
       monitored individually but their collective effectiveness should be considered
       together.

2.5    The development of the CCS requires detailed technical and process knowledge.
       Potential sources of contamination are attributable to microbial and cellular debris
       (e.g. pyrogen, endotoxin) as well as particulate (e.g. glass and other visible and
       sub-visible particles).

       Elements to be considered within a CCS should include (but are not limited to):

       i.    design of both the plant and processes including the associated
             documentation;


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -3-                             25 August 2023
                                      Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products




        ii.   premises and equipment;

       iii.   personnel;

       iv.    utilities;

        v.    raw material controls – including in-process controls;

       vi.    product containers and closures;

      vii.      vendor approval – such as key component suppliers, sterilisation of
              components and single use systems (SUS), and critical service providers;

      viii.   management of outsourced activities and availability/transfer of critical
              information between parties, e.g. contract sterilisation services;

       ix.    process risk management;

        x.    process validation;

       xi.    validation of sterilisation processes;

      xii.    preventative maintenance – maintaining equipment, utilities and premises
              (planned and unplanned maintenance) to a standard that will ensure there is
              no additional risk of contamination;

      xiii.   cleaning and disinfection;

      xiv.    monitoring systems - including an assessment of the feasibility of the
              introduction of scientifically sound, alternative methods that optimize the
              detection of environmental contamination;

      xv.     prevention mechanisms – trend analysis, detailed investigation, root cause
              determination, corrective and preventive actions (CAPA) and the need for
              comprehensive investigational tools;

      xvi.    continuous improvement based on information derived from the above.

2.6     The CCS should consider all aspects of contamination control with ongoing and
        periodic review resulting in updates within the pharmaceutical quality system as
        appropriate. Changes to the systems in place should be assessed for any impact
        on the CCS before and after implementation.

2.7     The manufacturer should take all steps and precautions necessary to assure the
        sterility of the products manufactured within its facilities. Sole reliance for sterility
        or other quality aspects should not be placed on any terminal process or finished
        product test.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                           -4-                             25 August 2023
                                    Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



3       Pharmaceutical Quality System (PQS)
3.1     The manufacture of sterile products is a complex activity that requires specific
        controls and measures to ensure the quality of products manufactured.
        Accordingly, the manufacturer’s PQS should encompass and address the
        specific requirements of sterile product manufacture and ensure that all activities
        are effectively controlled so that the risk of microbial, particulate and
        endotoxin/pyrogen contamination is minimized in sterile products. In addition to
        the PQS requirements detailed in Chapter 1 of the GMP Guide (Part I – Basic
        Requirements for Medicinal Products), the PQS for sterile product manufacture
        should also ensure that:

        i.   An effective risk management system is integrated into all areas of the
             product life cycle with the aim to minimize microbial contamination and to
             ensure the quality of sterile products manufactured.

       ii.   The manufacturer has sufficient knowledge and expertise in relation to the
             products manufactured and the equipment, engineering and manufacturing
             methods employed that have an impact on product quality.

      iii.   Root cause analysis of procedural, process or equipment failure is performed
             in such a way that the risk to product is correctly identified and understood
             so that suitable corrective and preventive actions (CAPA) are implemented.

      iv.    Risk management is applied in the development and maintenance of the
             CCS, to identify, assess, reduce/eliminate (where applicable) and control
             contamination risks. Risk management should be documented and should
             include the rationale for decisions taken in relation to risk reduction and
             acceptance of residual risk.

       v.    Senior management should effectively oversee the state of control
             throughout the facility and product lifecycle. Risk management outcome
             should be reviewed regularly as part of the on-going quality management,
             during change, in the event of a significant emerging problem, and during the
             periodic product quality review.

      vi.    Processes associated with the finishing, storage and transport of sterile
             products should not compromise the sterile product. Aspects that should be
             considered include: container integrity, risks of contamination and avoidance
             of degradation by ensuring that products are stored and maintained in
             accordance with the registered storage conditions.

      vii.   Persons responsible for the certification/release of sterile products have
             appropriate access to manufacturing and quality information and possess
             adequate knowledge and experience in the manufacture of sterile products
             and the associated critical quality attributes. This is in order to allow such
             persons to determine if the sterile products have been manufactured in
             accordance with the registered specifications and approved process and are
             of the required quality.

3.2     All non-conformities, such as sterility test failures, environmental monitoring
        excursions or deviations from established procedures should be adequately



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -5-                            25 August 2023
                                   Annex 1      Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       investigated before certification/release of the batch. The investigation should
       determine the potential impact upon process and product quality and whether
       any other processes or batches are potentially impacted. The reason for including
       or excluding a product or batch from the scope of the investigation should be
       clearly justified and recorded.

4      Premises
4.1    The manufacture of sterile products should be carried out in appropriate
       cleanrooms, entry to which should be through change rooms that act as airlocks
       for personnel and airlocks for equipment and materials. Cleanrooms and change
       rooms should be maintained to an appropriate cleanliness standard and supplied
       with air which has passed through filters of an appropriate efficiency. Controls
       and monitoring should be scientifically justified and should effectively evaluate
       the state of environmental conditions of cleanrooms, airlocks and pass-through
       hatches.

4.2    The various operations of component preparation, product preparation and filling
       should be carried out with appropriate technical and operational separation
       measures within the cleanroom or facility to prevent mix up and contamination.

4.3    Restricted Access Barrier Systems (RABS) or isolators are beneficial in assuring
       required conditions and minimizing microbial contamination associated with
       direct human interventions in the critical zone. Their use should be considered in
       the CCS. Any alternative approaches to the use of RABS or isolators should be
       justified.

4.4    For the manufacture of sterile products there are four grades of cleanroom/zone.
      Grade A: The critical zone for high-risk operations (e.g. aseptic processing line,
      filling zone, stopper bowl, open primary packaging or for making aseptic
      connections under the protection of first air). Normally, such conditions are
      provided by a localised airflow protection, such as unidirectional airflow
      workstations within RABS or isolators. The maintenance of unidirectional airflow
      should be demonstrated and qualified across the whole of the grade A area.
      Direct intervention (e.g. without the protection of barrier and glove port
      technology) into the grade A area by operators should be minimized by premises,
      equipment, process and procedural design.
      Grade B: For aseptic preparation and filling, this is the background cleanroom for
      grade A (where it is not an isolator). Air pressure differences should be
      continuously monitored. Cleanrooms of lower grade than grade B can be
      considered where isolator technology is used (see paragraph 4.20).
      Grade C and D: These are cleanrooms used for carrying out less critical
      stages in the manufacture of aseptically filled sterile products or as a
      background for isolators. They can also be used for the preparation/filling of
      terminally sterilised products. (See section 8 for the specific details on terminal
      sterilisation activities).

4.5   In cleanrooms and critical zones, all exposed surfaces should be smooth,
      impervious and unbroken in order to minimize the shedding or accumulation of
      particles or micro-organisms.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                      -6-                            25 August 2023
                                    Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products




4.6    To reduce accumulation of dust and to facilitate cleaning there should be no
       recesses that are difficult to clean effectively, therefore projecting ledges,
       shelves, cupboards and equipment should be kept to a minimum. Doors should
       be designed to avoid recesses that cannot be cleaned. Sliding doors may be
       undesirable for this reason.

4.7    Materials used in cleanrooms, both in the construction of the room and for items
       used within the room, should be selected to minimize generation of particles and
       to permit the repeated application of cleaning, disinfectant and sporicidal agents
       where used.

4.8    Ceilings should be designed and sealed to prevent contamination from the space
       above them.

4.9    Sinks and drains should be prohibited in the grade A and grade B areas. In other
       cleanrooms, air breaks should be fitted between the machine or sink and the
       drains. Floor drains in lower grade cleanrooms should be fitted with traps or water
       seals designed to prevent back flow and should be regularly cleaned, disinfected
       and maintained.

4.10   The transfer of equipment and materials into and out of the cleanrooms and
       critical zones is one of the greatest potential sources of contamination. Any
       activities with the potential to compromise the cleanliness of cleanrooms or the
       critical zone should be assessed and if they cannot be eliminated, appropriate
       controls should be implemented.

4.11   The transfer of materials, equipment, and components into the grade A or B areas
       should be carried out via a unidirectional process. Where possible, items should
       be sterilised and passed into these areas through double-ended sterilisers (e.g.
       through a double-door autoclave or depyrogenation oven/tunnel) sealed into the
       wall. Where sterilisation upon transfer of the items is not possible, a procedure
       which achieves the same objective of not introducing contamination should be
       validated and implemented, (e.g. using an effective transfer disinfection process,
       rapid transfer systems for isolators or, for gaseous or liquid materials, a bacteria-
       retentive filter). The removal of items from the grade A and B areas (e.g.
       materials, waste, environmental samples) should be carried out via a separate
       unidirectional process. If this is not possible, time-based separation of movement
       (incoming/exiting material) by procedure should be considered and controls
       applied to avoid potential contamination of incoming items.

4.12   Airlocks should be designed and used to provide physical separation and to
       minimize microbial and particle contamination of the different areas and should
       be present for material and personnel moving between different grades.
       Wherever possible, airlocks used for personnel movement should be separated
       from those used for material movement. Where this is not practical, time-based
       separation of movement (personnel/material) by procedure should be
       considered. Airlocks should be flushed effectively with filtered air to ensure that
       the grade of the cleanroom is maintained. The final stage of the airlock should, in
       the “at rest” state, be of the same cleanliness grade (viable and total particle) as
       the cleanroom into which it leads. The use of separate change rooms for entering
       and leaving the grade B area is desirable. Where this is not practical, time-based
       separation of activities (ingress/egress) by procedure should be considered.


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -7-                            25 August 2023
                                       Annex 1      Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       Where the CCS indicates that the risk of contamination is high, separate change
       rooms for entering and leaving production areas should be used. Airlocks should
       be designed as follows:

       i.      Personnel airlocks: Areas of increasing cleanliness used for entry of
               personnel (e.g. from the grade D area to the grade C area to the grade B
               area). In general hand washing facilities should be provided only in the first
               stage of the changing room and not be present in changing rooms directly
               accessing the grade B area.

       ii.     Material airlocks: used for materials and equipment transfer.

              Only materials and equipment that have been included on an approved list
               and assessed during validation of the transfer process, should be transferred
               into the grade A or grade B areas via an airlock or pass-through hatches.
               Equipment and materials (intended for use in the grade A area) should be
               protected when transiting through the grade B area. Any unapproved items
               that require transfer should be pre-approved as an exception. Appropriate
               risk assessment and mitigation measures should be applied and recorded as
               per the manufacturer's CCS and should include a specific disinfection and
               monitoring programme approved by quality assurance.

              Pass-through hatches should be designed to protect the higher-grade
               environment, for example by effective flushing with an active filtered air
               supply.

              The movement of material or equipment from lower grade or unclassified
               area to higher grade clean areas should be subject to cleaning and
               disinfection commensurate with the risk and in line with the CCS.

4.13   For pass-through hatches and airlocks (for material and personnel), the entry and
       exit doors should not be opened simultaneously. For airlocks leading to the
       grade A and grade B areas, an interlocking system should be used. For airlocks
       leading to grade C and D areas, a visual and/or audible warning system should
       be operated as a minimum. Where required to maintain area segregation, a time
       delay between the closing and opening of interlocked doors should be
       established.

4.14   Cleanrooms should be supplied with a filtered air supply that maintains a positive
       pressure and/or an airflow relative to the background environment of a lower
       grade under all operational conditions and should flush the area effectively.
       Adjacent rooms of different grades should have an air pressure difference of a
       minimum of 10 Pascals (guidance value). Particular attention should be paid to
       the protection of the critical zone. The recommendations regarding air supplies
       and pressures may need to be modified where it is necessary to contain certain
       materials (e.g. pathogenic, highly toxic or radioactive products or live viral or
       bacterial materials). The modification may include positively or negatively
       pressurized airlocks that prevent the hazardous material from contaminating
       surrounding areas. Decontamination of facilities (e.g. the cleanrooms and the
       heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems) and the treatment of
       air leaving a clean area, may be necessary for some operations. Where
       containment requires air to flow into a critical zone, the source of the air should



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                          -8-                              25 August 2023
                                      Annex 1      Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       be from an area of the same or higher grade.

4.15   Airflow patterns within cleanrooms and zones should be visualised to
       demonstrate that there is no ingress from lower grade to higher grade areas and
       that air does not travel from less clean areas (such as the floor) or over operators
       or equipment that may transfer contamination to the higher-grade areas. Where
       unidirectional airflow is required, visualisation studies should be performed to
       determine compliance, (see paragraphs 4.4 & 4.19). When filled, closed products
       are transferred to an adjacent cleanroom of a lower grade via a small egress
       point, airflow visualization studies should demonstrate that air does not ingress
       from the lower grade cleanrooms to the grade B area. Where air movement is
       shown to be a contamination risk to the clean area or critical zone, corrective
       actions, such as design improvement, should be implemented. Airflow pattern
       studies should be performed both at rest and in operation (e.g. simulating
       operator interventions). Video recordings of the airflow patterns should be
       retained. The outcome of the air visualisation studies should be documented and
       considered when establishing the facility's environmental monitoring programme.

4.16   Indicators of air pressure differences should be fitted between cleanrooms and/or
       between isolators and their background. Set-points and the criticality of air
       pressure differences should be considered within the CCS. Air pressure
       differences identified as critical should be continuously monitored and recorded.
       A warning system should be in place to instantly indicate and warn operators of
       any failure in the air supply or reduction of air pressure differences (below set
       limits for those identified as critical). The warning signal should not be overridden
       without assessment and a procedure should be available to outline the steps to
       be taken when a warning signal is given. Where alarm delays are set, these
       should be assessed and justified within the CCS. Other air pressure differences
       should be monitored and recorded at regular intervals.

4.17   Facilities should be designed to permit observation of production activities from
       outside the grade A and B areas (e.g. through the provision of windows or remote
       cameras with a full view of the area and processes to allow observation and
       supervision without entry). This requirement should be considered when
       designing new facilities or during refurbishment of existing facilities.


BARRIER TECHNOLOGIES

4.18   Isolators or RABS, which are different technologies, and the associated
       processes, should be designed to provide protection through separation of the
       grade A environment from the environment of the surrounding room. The hazards
       introduced from entry or removal of items during processing should be minimized
       and supported by high capability transfer technologies or validated systems that
       robustly prevent contamination and are appropriate for the respective technology.

4.19   The design of the technology and processes used should ensure appropriate
       conditions are maintained in the critical zone to protect the exposed product
       during operations.

       i.     Isolators:

            a. The design of open isolators should ensure grade A conditions with first air


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -9-                            25 August 2023
                                         Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



                protection in the critical zone and unidirectional airflow that sweeps over and
                away from exposed products during processing.
             b. The design of closed isolators should ensure grade A conditions with
                adequate protection for exposed products during processing. Airflow may not
                be fully unidirectional in closed isolators where simple operations are
                conducted. However, any turbulent airflow should not increase risk of
                contamination of the exposed product. Where processing lines are included
                in closed isolators, grade A conditions should be ensured with first air
                protection in the critical zone and unidirectional airflow that sweeps over and
                away from exposed products during processing.
             c. Negative pressure isolators should only be used when containment of the
                product is considered essential (e.g. radiopharmaceutical products) and
                specialized risk control measures should be applied to ensure the critical
                zone is not compromised.

       ii.      RABS:

                The design of RABS should ensure grade A conditions with unidirectional
                airflow and first air protection in the critical zone. A positive airflow from the
                critical zone to the supporting background environment should be
                maintained.

4.20   The background environment for isolators or RABS should ensure the risk of
       transfer of contamination is minimized.

       i.       Isolators:

             a. The background environment for open isolators should generally correspond
                to a minimum of grade C. The background for closed isolators should
                correspond to a minimum of grade D. The decision on the background
                classification should be based on risk assessment and justified in the CCS.
             b. Key considerations when performing the risk assessment for the CCS of an
                isolator should include (but are not limited to); the bio-decontamination
                programme, the extent of automation, the impact of glove manipulations that
                may potentially compromise ‘first air’ protection of critical process points, the
                impact of potential loss of barrier/glove integrity, transfer mechanisms used
                and activities such as set-up or maintenance that may require the doors to
                be opened prior to the final bio-decontamination of the isolator. Where
                additional process risks are identified, a higher grade of background should
                be considered unless appropriately justified in the CCS.
             c. Airflow pattern studies should be performed at the interfaces of open
                isolators to demonstrate the absence of air ingress.

       ii.      RABS:

                The background environment for RABS used for aseptic processing, should
                correspond to a minimum of grade B and airflow pattern studies should be
                performed to demonstrate the absence of air ingress during interventions,
                including door openings if applicable.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                            -10-                             25 August 2023
                                       Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



4.21   The materials used for glove systems (for both isolators and RABS) should be
       demonstrated to have appropriate mechanical and chemical resistance. The
       frequency of glove replacement should be defined within the CCS.

       i.      Isolators:

             a. For isolators, leak testing of the glove system should be performed using a
                methodology demonstrated to be suitable for the task and criticality. The
                testing should be performed at defined intervals. Generally glove integrity
                testing should be performed at a minimum frequency of the beginning and
                end of each batch or campaign. Additional glove integrity testing may be
                necessary depending on the validated campaign length.
               Glove integrity monitoring should include a visual inspection associated with
               each use and following any manipulation that may affect the integrity of the
               system.
               For manual aseptic processing activities where single unit or small batch
               sizes are produced, the frequency of integrity verification may be based on
               other criteria, such as the beginning and end of each manufacturing session.
             b. Integrity / leak testing of isolator systems should be performed at defined
                intervals.

       ii.     RABS:

               For RABS, gloves used in the grade A area should be sterilised before
               installation and sterilised or effectively bio-decontaminated by a validated
               method prior to each manufacturing campaign. If exposed to the background
               environment during operation, disinfection using an approved methodology
               following each exposure should be completed. Gloves should be visually
               examined with each use, and integrity testing should be performed at
               periodic intervals.

4.22   Decontamination methods (cleaning and bio-decontamination, and where
       applicable inactivation for biological materials) should be appropriately defined
       and controlled. The cleaning process prior to the bio-decontamination step is
       essential; any residues that remain may inhibit the effectiveness of the
       decontamination process. Evidence should also be available to demonstrate that
       the cleaning and bio-decontamination agents used do not have adverse impact
       on the product produced within the RABS or isolator.

       i.      For isolators

               The bio-decontamination process of the interior should be automated,
               validated and controlled within defined cycle parameters and should include
               a sporicidal agent in a suitable form (e.g. gaseous or vaporized form). Gloves
               should be appropriately extended with fingers separated to ensure contact
               with the agent. Methods used (cleaning and sporicidal bio-decontamination)
               should render the interior surfaces and critical zone of the isolator free from
               viable microorganisms.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                          -11-                            25 August 2023
                                            Annex 1      Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



         ii.      For RABS

               The sporicidal disinfection should include the routine application of a sporicidal
               agent using a method that has been validated and demonstrated to robustly
               include all areas of the interior surfaces and ensure a suitable environment for
               aseptic processing.


CLEANROOM AND CLEAN AIR EQUIPMENT QUALIFICATION

4.23     Cleanrooms and clean air equipment such as unidirectional airflow units (UDAFs),
         RABS and isolators, used for the manufacture of sterile products, should be
         qualified according to the required characteristics of the environment. Each
         manufacturing operation requires an appropriate environmental cleanliness level
         in the operational state in order to minimize the risk of contamination of the product
         or materials being handled. Appropriate cleanliness levels in the “at rest” and
         “operational” states should be maintained.

4.24     Cleanrooms and clean air equipment should be qualified using methodology in
         accordance with the requirements of Annex 15. Cleanroom qualification (including
         classification) should be clearly differentiated from operational environmental
         monitoring.

4.25     Cleanroom and clean air equipment qualification is the overall process of
         assessing the level of compliance of a classified cleanroom or clean air
         equipment with its intended use. As part of the qualification requirements of
         Annex 15, the qualification of cleanrooms and clean air equipment should include
         (where relevant to the design/operation of the installation):

          i.      installed filter system leakage and integrity testing,

         ii.      airflow tests - volume and velocity,

        iii.      air pressure difference test,

        iv.       airflow direction test and visualisation,

         v.       microbial airborne and surface contamination,

        vi.       temperature measurement test,

       vii.       relative humidity test,

       viii.      recovery test,

        ix.       containment leak test.

       Reference for the qualification of the cleanrooms and clean air equipment can be
       found in the ISO 14644 series of standards.

4.26     Cleanroom classification is part of the cleanroom qualification and is a method of
         assessing the level of air cleanliness against a specification for a cleanroom or
         clean air equipment by measuring the total particle concentration. Classification


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                              -12-                            25 August 2023
                                         Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



          activities should be scheduled and performed in order to avoid any impact on
          process or product quality. For example, initial classification should be performed
          during simulated operations and reclassification performed during simulated
          operations or during aseptic process simulation (APS).

4.27      For cleanroom classification, the total of particles equal to or greater than 0.5 and
          5 µm should be measured. This measurement should be performed both at rest
          and in simulated operations in accordance with the limits specified in Table 1.

Table 1: Maximum permitted total particle concentration for classification

                   Maximum limits for total particle       Maximum limits for total particle
      Grade                ≥ 0.5 µm/m3                               ≥ 5 µm/m3

                       at rest         in operation           at rest           in operation
        A              3 520               3 520          Not specified (a)   Not specified (a)
        B              3 520              352 000         Not specified (a)         2 930
        C             352 000            3 520 000             2 930               29 300
                     3 520 000              Not               29 300                 Not
        D
                                     predetermined (b)                        predetermined (b)

(a)
       Classification including 5µm particles may be considered where indicated by the
       CCS or historical trends.
(b)
       For grade D, in operation limits are not predetermined. The manufacturer should
       establish in operation limits based on a risk assessment and routine data where
       applicable.

4.28      For classification of the cleanroom, the minimum number of sampling locations
          and their positioning can be found in ISO 14644 Part 1. For the aseptic processing
          area and the background environment (the grade A and grade B areas,
          respectively), additional sample locations should be considered and all critical
          processing areas such as the point of fill and container closure feeder bowls
          should be evaluated. Critical processing locations should be determined by
          documented risk assessment and knowledge of the process and operations to
          be performed in the area.

4.29      Cleanroom classification should be carried out in the “at rest” and “in operation”
          states.

          i.    The definition of “at rest” state is the condition whereby the installation of all
                the utilities is complete including any functioning HVAC, with the main
                manufacturing equipment installed as specified but not operating and without
                personnel present in the room.

         ii.    The definition of “in operation” state is the condition where the installation of
                the cleanroom is complete, the HVAC system fully operational, equipment
                installed and functioning in the manufacturer’s defined operating mode with
                the maximum number of personnel present performing or simulating routine
                operational work.

         iii.   The total particle limits given in Table 1 above for the “at rest” state should
                be achieved after a “clean up” period on completion of operations and line
                clearance/cleaning activities. The "clean up" period (guidance value of less


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                            -13-                              25 August 2023
                                           Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



                than 20 minutes) should be determined during the qualification of the rooms,
                documented and adhered to in procedures to reinstate a qualified state of
                cleanliness if disrupted during operation.

4.30        The speed of air supplied by unidirectional airflow systems should be clearly
            justified in the qualification protocol including the location for air speed
            measurement. Air speed should be designed, measured and maintained to
            ensure that appropriate unidirectional air movement provides protection of the
            product and open components at the working position (e.g. where high-risk
            operations occur and where product and/or components are exposed).
            Unidirectional airflow systems should provide a homogeneous air speed in a
            range of 0.36 – 0.54 m/s (guidance value) at the working position, unless
            otherwise scientifically justified in the CCS. Airflow visualization studies should
            correlate with the air speed measurement.

4.31        The microbial contamination level of the cleanrooms should be determined as
            part of the cleanroom qualification. The number of sampling locations should be
            based on a documented risk assessment and the results obtained from room
            classification, air visualization studies and knowledge of the process and
            operations to be performed in the area. The maximum limits for microbial
            contamination during qualification for each grade are given in Table 2.
            Qualification should include both “at rest” and “in operation” states.

Table 2: Maximum permitted microbial contamination level during qualification

                                                              Settle plates          Contact plates
            Grade            Air sample                    (diameter 90 mm)           (diameter 55
                              CFU/m3                        CFU/4 hours (a)          mm) CFU/plate
               A                                           No growth
               B                     10                            5                         5
               C                    100                           50                        25
               D                    200                          100                        50

       a)    Settle plates should be exposed for the duration of operations and changed as required
             after a maximum of 4 hours. Exposure time should be based on recovery studies and
             should not allow desiccation of the media used.

       Note 1:      All methods indicated for a specific grade in the table should be used for qualifying
                    the area of that specific grade. If one of the methods tabulated is not used, or
                    alternative methods are used, the approach taken should be appropriately
                    justified.

       Note 2:      Limits are applied using CFU throughout the document. If different or new
                    technologies are used that present results in a manner different from CFU, the
                    manufacturer should scientifically justify the limits applied and where possible
                    correlate them to CFU.

       Note 3:      For the qualification of personnel gowning, the limits given for contact plates and
                    glove prints in Table 6 should apply.

       Note 4:      Sampling methods should not pose a risk of contamination to the manufacturing
                    operations.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                               -14-                               25 August 2023
                                         Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



4.32    The requalification of cleanrooms and clean air equipment should be carried out
        periodically following defined procedures. The requalification should include at a
        minimum the following:

         i.   cleanroom classification (total particle concentration),
         ii. integrity test of final filters,
         iii. airflow volume measurement,
        iv. verification of air pressure difference between rooms, and
         v. air velocity test
        (Note: For grade B, C and D the air velocity test should be performed according
        to a risk assessment documented as part of the CCS. However, it is required for
        filling zones supplied with unidirectional airflow (e.g. when filling terminally
        sterilised products or background to grade A and RABS). For grades with non-
        unidirectional airflow, a measurement of recovery testing should replace velocity
        testing).

        The maximum time interval for requalification of grade A & B areas, is 6 months.
        The maximum time interval for requalification of grade C & D areas, is 12 months.

        Appropriate requalification consisting of at least the above tests should also be
        carried out following completion of remedial action implemented to rectify an out
        of compliance equipment or facility condition or after changes to equipment,
        facility or processes as appropriate. The significance of a change should be
        determined through the change management process. Examples of changes to
        be considered include but are not limited to the following:

        i.    interruption of air movement which affects the operation of the installation,
       ii.    change in the design of the cleanroom or of the operational setting
              parameters of the HVAC system,
       iii.   special maintenance which affects the operation of the installation (e.g.
              change of final filters).


DISINFECTION

4.33    The disinfection of cleanrooms is particularly important. They should be cleaned
        and disinfected thoroughly in accordance with a written programme. For
        disinfection to be effective, prior cleaning to remove surface contamination should
        be performed. Cleaning programmes should effectively remove disinfectant
        residues. More than one type of disinfecting agent should be employed to ensure
        that where they have different modes of action, their combined usage is effective
        against bacteria and fungi. Disinfection should include the periodic use of a
        sporicidal agent. Monitoring should be undertaken regularly in order to assess
        the effectiveness of the disinfection programme and to detect changes in types
        of microbial flora (e.g. organisms resistant to the disinfection regime currently in
        use).

4.34    The disinfection process should be validated. Validation studies should
        demonstrate the suitability and effectiveness of disinfectants in the specific


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                            -15-                            25 August 2023
                                    Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



        manner in which they are used and on the type of surface material, or
        representative material if justified, and should support the in-use expiry periods
        of prepared solutions.

4.35    Disinfectants and detergents used in grade A and grade B areas should be sterile
        prior to use. Disinfectants used in grade C and D may also be required to be
        sterile where determined in the CCS. Where the disinfectants and detergents are
        diluted / prepared by the sterile product manufacturer, this should be done in a
        manner to prevent contamination and they should be monitored for microbial
        contamination. Dilutions should be kept in previously cleaned containers (and
        sterilized where applicable) and should only be stored for the defined period. If
        the disinfectants and detergents are supplied “ready-made” then results from
        certificates of analysis or conformance can be accepted subject to successful
        completion of the appropriate vendor qualification.

4.36    Where fumigation or vapour disinfection (e.g. Vapour-phase Hydrogen Peroxide)
        of cleanrooms and associated surfaces are used, the effectiveness of any
        fumigation agent and dispersion system should be understood and validated.


5      Equipment
5.1     A written, detailed description of the equipment design should be available
        (including process and instrumentation diagrams as appropriate). This should
        form part of the initial qualification package and be kept up to date.

5.2     Equipment monitoring requirements should be defined in “user requirements
        specifications” during early stages of development, and confirmed during
        qualification. Process and equipment alarm events should be acknowledged and
        evaluated for trends. The frequency at which alarms are assessed should be
        based on their criticality (with critical alarms reviewed immediately).

5.3     As far as practicable, equipment, fittings and services should be designed and
        installed so that operations, maintenance, and repairs can be performed outside
        the cleanroom. If maintenance has to be performed in the cleanroom, and the
        required standards of cleanliness and/or asepsis cannot be maintained, then
        precautions such as restricting access to the work area to specified personnel,
        generation of clearly defined work protocols and maintenance procedures should
        be considered. Additional cleaning, disinfection and environmental monitoring
        should also be considered. If sterilisation of equipment is required, it should be
        carried out, wherever possible, after complete reassembly.

5.4     The cleaning process should be validated to be able to:

        i.    remove any residue or debris that would detrimentally impact the
              effectiveness of the disinfecting agent used,
        ii.   minimize chemical, microbial and particulate contamination of the product
              during the process and prior to disinfection.

5.5     For aseptic processes, direct and indirect product contact parts should be
        sterilised. Direct product contact parts are those that the product passes through,
        such as filling needles or pumps. Indirect product contact parts are equipment


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -16-                            25 August 2023
                                     Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       parts that do not contact the product, but may come into contact with other
       sterilised surfaces, the sterility of which is critical to the overall product sterility
       (e.g. sterilised items such as stopper bowls and guides, and sterilised
       components).

5.6    All equipment such as sterilisers, air handling systems (including air filtration) and
       water systems should be subject to qualification, monitoring and planned
       maintenance. Upon completion of maintenance, their return to use should be
       approved.

5.7    Where unplanned maintenance of equipment critical to the sterility of the product
       is to be carried out, an assessment of the potential impact to the sterility of the
       product should be performed and recorded.

5.8    A conveyor belt should not pass through a partition between a grade A or B
       area and a processing area of lower air cleanliness, unless the belt itself is
       continually sterilised (e.g. in a sterilising tunnel).

5.9    Particle counters, including sampling tubing, should be qualified. The
       manufacturer’s recommended specifications should be considered for tube
       diameter and bend radii. Tube length should typically be no longer than 1m unless
       justified and the number of bends should be minimized. Portable particle counters
       with a short length of sample tubing should be used for classification purposes.
       Isokinetic sampling heads should be used in unidirectional airflow systems. They
       should be oriented appropriately and positioned as close as possible to the critical
       location to ensure that samples are representative.


6      Utilities
6.1    The nature and extent of controls applied to utility systems should be
       commensurate with the risk to product quality associated with the utility. The
       impact should be determined via a risk assessment and documented as part of
       the CCS.

6.2    In general, higher risk utilities are those that:

       i.    directly contact product e.g. water for washing and rinsing, gases and steam
             for sterilisation,

      ii.    contact materials that will ultimately become part of the product,

      iii.   contact surfaces that come into contact with the product,

      iv.    otherwise directly impact the product.

6.3    Utilities should be designed, installed, qualified, operated, maintained and
       monitored in a manner to ensure that the utility system functions as expected.

6.4    Results for critical parameters and critical quality attributes of high risk utilities
       should be subject to regular trend analysis to ensure that system capabilities
       remain appropriate.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -17-                            25 August 2023
                                      Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products




6.5     Records of utility system installation should be maintained throughout the
        system’s life-cycle. Such records should include current drawings and schematic
        diagrams, construction material lists and system specifications. Typically,
        important information includes attributes such as:

        i.    pipeline flow direction, slopes, diameter and length,

       ii.    tank and vessel details,

       iii.   valves, filters, drains, sampling and user points,

6.6     Pipes, ducts and other utilities should not be present in cleanrooms. If
        unavoidable, then they should be installed so that they do not create recesses,
        unsealed openings and surfaces which are difficult to clean. Installation should
        allow cleaning and disinfection of outer surface of the pipes.


WATER SYSTEMS

6.7     Water treatment plant and distribution systems should be designed, constructed,
        installed, commissioned, qualified, monitored and maintained to prevent
        microbiological contamination and to ensure a reliable source of water of an
        appropriate quality. Measures should be taken to minimize the risk of presence
        of particulates, microbial contamination/proliferation and endotoxin/pyrogen (e.g.
        sloping of piping to provide complete drainage and the avoidance of dead legs).
        Where filters are included in the system, special attention should be given to their
        monitoring and maintenance. Water produced should comply with the current
        monograph of the relevant Pharmacopeia.

6.8     Water systems should be qualified and validated to maintain the appropriate
        levels of physical, chemical and microbial control, taking the effect of seasonal
        variation into account.

6.9     Water flow should remain turbulent through the pipes in water distribution
        systems to minimize the risk of microbial adhesion, and subsequent biofilm
        formation. The flow rate should be established during qualification and be
        routinely monitored.

6.10    Water for injections (WFI) should be produced from water meeting specifications
        that have been defined during the qualification process, stored and distributed in
        a manner which minimizes the risk of microbial growth (e.g. by constant
        circulation at a temperature above 70°C). WFI should be produced by distillation
        or by a purification process that is equivalent to distillation. This may include
        reverse osmosis coupled with other appropriate techniques such as
        electrodeionization (EDI), ultrafiltration or nanofiltration.

6.11    Where WFI storage tanks are equipped with hydrophobic bacteria retentive vent
        filters, the filters should not be a source of contamination and the integrity of the
        filter tested before installation and after use. Controls should be in place to
        prevent condensation formation on the filter (e.g. by heating).

6.12    To minimize the risk of biofilm formation, sterilisation, disinfection or regeneration


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -18-                            25 August 2023
                                    Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       of water systems should be carried out according to a predetermined schedule
       and as a remedial action following out-of-limit or specification results. Disinfection
       of a water system with chemicals should be followed by a validated
       rinsing/flushing     procedure.     Water        should       be     tested      after
       disinfection/regeneration. Chemical testing results should be approved before the
       water system is returned to use and microbiological/endotoxin results verified to
       be within specification and approved before batches manufactured using water
       from the system are considered for certification/release.

6.13   Regular ongoing chemical and microbial monitoring of water systems should be
       performed to ensure that the water continues to meet compendial expectations.
       Alert levels should be based on the initial qualification data and thereafter
       periodically reassessed on data obtained during subsequent re-qualifications,
       routine monitoring, and investigations. Review of ongoing monitoring data should
       be carried out to identify any adverse trend in system performance. Sampling
       programmes should reflect the requirements of the CCS and should include all
       outlets and points of use, at a specified interval, to ensure that representative
       water samples are obtained for analysis on a regular basis. Sample plans should
       be based on the qualification data, should consider the potential worst case
       sampling locations and should ensure that at least one representative sample is
       included every day of the water that is used for manufacturing processes.

6.14   Alert level excursions should be documented and reviewed, and include an
       investigation to determine whether the excursion is a single (isolated) event or if
       results are indicative of an adverse trend or system deterioration. Each action
       limit excursion should be investigated to determine the probable root causes and
       any potential impact on the quality of products and manufacturing processes as
       a result of the use of the water.

6.15   WFI systems should include continuous monitoring systems such as Total
       Organic Carbon (TOC) and conductivity, as these may give a better indication of
       overall system performance than discrete sampling. Sensor locations should be
       based on risk.


STEAM USED AS A DIRECT STERILISING AGENT

6.16   Feed water to a pure steam (clean steam) generator should be appropriately
       purified. Pure steam generators should be designed, qualified and operated in a
       manner to ensure that the quality of steam produced meets defined chemical and
       endotoxin levels.

6.17   Steam used as a direct sterilising agent should be of suitable quality and should
       not contain additives at a level which could cause contamination of product or
       equipment. For a generator supplying pure steam used for the direct sterilisation
       of materials or product-contact surfaces (e.g. porous / hard-good autoclave
       loads), steam condensate should meet the current monograph for WFI of the
       relevant Pharmacopeia (microbial testing is not mandatory for steam
       condensate). A suitable sampling schedule should be in place to ensure that
       representative pure steam is obtained for analysis on a regular basis. Other
       aspects of the quality of pure steam used for sterilisation should be assessed
       periodically against validated parameters. These parameters should include the
       following (unless otherwise justified): non-condensable gases, dryness value


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -19-                            25 August 2023
                                     Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       (dryness fraction) and superheat.


GASES AND VACUUM SYSTEMS

6.18   Gases that come in direct contact with the product/primary container surfaces
       should be of appropriate chemical, particulate and microbial quality. All relevant
       parameters, including oil and water content, should be specified, taking into
       account the use and type of the gas, the design of the gas generation system
       and, where applicable, comply with the current monograph of the relevant
       Pharmacopeia or the product quality requirement.

6.19   Gases used in aseptic processes should be filtered through a sterilising grade
       filter (with a nominal pore size of a maximum of 0.22 µm) at the point of use.
       Where the filter is used on a batch basis (e.g. for filtration of gas used for overlay
       of aseptically filled products) or as product vessel vent filter, then the filter should
       be integrity tested and the results reviewed as part of the batch
       certification/release process. Any transfer pipework or tubing that is located after
       the final sterilising grade filter should be sterilised. When gases are used in the
       process, microbial monitoring of the gas should be performed periodically at the
       point of use.

6.20   Where backflow from vacuum or pressure systems poses a potential risk to the
       product, there should be mechanism(s) to prevent backflow when the vacuum or
       pressure system is shut off.


HEATING AND COOLING AND HYDRAULIC SYSTEMS

6.21   Major items of equipment associated with hydraulic, heating and cooling systems
       should, where possible, be located outside the filling room. There should be
       appropriate controls to contain any spillage and/or cross contamination
       associated with the system fluids.

6.22   Any leaks from these systems that would present a risk to the product should be
       detectable (e.g. an indication system for leakage).


7      Personnel
7.1    The manufacturer should ensure that there are sufficient appropriate personnel,
       suitably qualified, trained and experienced in the manufacture and testing of
       sterile products, and any of the specific manufacturing technologies used in the
       site’s manufacturing operations, to ensure compliance with GMP applicable to
       the manufacture and handling of sterile products.

7.2    Only the minimum number of personnel required should be present in
       cleanrooms. The maximum number of operators in cleanrooms should be
       determined, documented and considered during activities such as initial
       qualification and APS, so as not to compromise sterility assurance.

7.3    All personnel including those performing cleaning, maintenance, monitoring and



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -20-                             25 August 2023
                                     Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       those that access cleanrooms should receive regular training, gowning
       qualification and assessment in disciplines relevant to the correct manufacture of
       sterile products. This training should include the basic elements of microbiology
       and hygiene, with a specific focus on cleanroom practices, contamination control,
       aseptic techniques and the protection of sterile products (for those operators
       entering the grade B cleanrooms and/or intervening into grade A) and the
       potential safety implications to the patient if the product is not sterile. The level of
       training should be based on the criticality of the function and area in which the
       personnel are working.

7.4    The personnel accessing grade A and B areas should be trained for aseptic
       gowning and aseptic behaviours. Compliance with aseptic gowning procedures
       should be confirmed by assessment and periodic reassessment at least annually,
       and should involve both visual and microbial assessment (using monitoring
       locations such as gloved fingers, forearms, chest and hood (facemask /
       forehead). See paragraph 9.30 for the expected limits). The unsupervised access
       to the grade A and grade B areas where aseptic operations are or will be
       conducted should be restricted to appropriately qualified personnel, who have
       passed the gowning assessment and have participated in a successful APS.

7.5    Unqualified personnel should not enter grade B cleanrooms or grade A in
       operation. If needed in exceptional cases, manufacturers should establish written
       procedures outlining the process by which unqualified personnel are brought into
       the grade B and A areas. An authorized person from the manufacturer should
       supervise the unqualified personnel during their activities and should assess the
       impact of these activities on the cleanliness of the area. Access by these persons
       should be assessed and recorded in accordance with the PQS.

7.6    There should be systems in place for the disqualification of personnel from
       working in or given unsupervised entry into cleanrooms that is based on aspects
       including ongoing assessment and/or identification of an adverse trend from the
       personnel monitoring programme and/or after being implicated in a failed APS.
       Once disqualified, retraining and requalification should be completed before
       permitting the operator to have any further involvement in aseptic practices. For
       operators entering grade B cleanrooms or performing intervention into grade A,
       this requalification should include consideration of participation in a successful
       APS.

7.7    High standards of personal hygiene and cleanliness are essential to prevent
       excessive shedding or increased risk of introduction of microbial contamination.
       Personnel involved in the manufacture of sterile products should be instructed to
       report any specific health conditions or ailments which may cause the shedding
       of abnormal numbers or types of contaminants and therefore preclude cleanroom
       access. Health conditions and actions to be taken with regard to personnel who
       could be introducing an undue microbial hazard should be provided by the
       designated competent person and described in procedures.

7.8    Personnel who have been engaged in the processing of human or animal tissue
       materials or of cultures of micro-organisms, other than those used in the current
       manufacturing process, or any activities that may have a negative impact to
       quality (e.g. microbial contamination), should not enter clean areas unless clearly
       defined and effective decontamination and entry procedures have been followed
       and documented.


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -21-                             25 August 2023
                                        Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products




7.9         Wristwatches, make-up, jewellery, other personal items such as mobile phones
            and any other non-essential items should not be allowed in clean areas.
            Electronic devices used in cleanrooms, e.g. mobile phones and tablets, that are
            supplied by the manufacturer solely for use in the cleanrooms, may be acceptable
            if suitably designed to permit cleaning and disinfection commensurate with the
            grade in which they are used. The use and disinfection of such equipment should
            be included in the CCS.

7.10        Cleanroom gowning and hand washing should follow a written procedure
            designed to minimize contamination of cleanroom clothing and/or the transfer of
            contaminants to the clean areas.

7.11        The clothing and its quality should be appropriate for the process and the
            grade of the working area. It should be worn in such a way as to protect the
            product from contamination. When the type of clothing chosen needs to provide
            the operator protection from the product, it should not compromise the protection
            of the product from contamination. Garments should be visually checked for
            cleanliness and integrity immediately prior to and after gowning. Gown integrity
            should also be checked upon exit. For sterilised garments and eye coverings,
            particular attention should be taken to ensure they have been subject to the
            sterilisation process, are within their specified hold time and that the packaging
            is visually inspected to ensure it is integral before use. Reusable garments
            (including eye coverings) should be replaced if damage is identified, or at a set
            frequency that is determined during qualification studies. The qualification of
            garments should consider any necessary garment testing requirements,
            including damage to garments that may not be identified by visual inspection
            alone.

7.12        Clothing should be chosen to limit shedding due to operators’ movement.

7.13        A description of typical clothing required for each cleanliness grade is given
            below:

       i.    Grade B (including access / interventions into grade A): appropriate garments
             that are dedicated for use under a sterilised suit should be worn before gowning
             (see paragraph 7.14). Appropriately sterilised, non-powdered, rubber or plastic
             gloves should be worn while donning the sterilised garments. Sterile headgear
             should enclose all hair (including facial hair) and where separate from the rest
             of the gown, it should be tucked into the neck of the sterile suit. A sterile
             facemask and sterile eye coverings (e.g. goggles) should be worn to cover and
             enclose all facial skin and prevent the shedding of droplets and particles.
             Appropriate sterilised footwear (e.g. over-boots) should be worn. Trouser legs
             should be tucked inside the footwear. Garment sleeves should be tucked into a
             second pair of sterile gloves worn over the pair worn while donning the gown.
             The protective clothing should minimize shedding of fibres or particles and
             retain particles shed by the body. The particle shedding and the particle
             retention efficiencies of the garments should be assessed during the garment
             qualification. Garments should be packed and folded in such a way as to allow
             operators to don the gown without contacting the outer surface of the garment
             and to prevent the garment from touching the floor.
      ii.    Grade C: Hair, beards and moustaches should be covered. A single or two-



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                           -22-                            25 August 2023
                                       Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



           piece trouser suit gathered at the wrists and with high neck and appropriately
           disinfected shoes or overshoes should be worn. They should minimize the
           shedding of fibres and particles.
   iii.    Grade D: Hair, beards and moustaches should be covered. A general protective
           suit and appropriately disinfected shoes or overshoes should be worn.
           Appropriate measures should be taken to avoid any ingress of contaminants
           from outside the clean area.
   iv.     Additional gowning including gloves and facemask may be required in grade C
           and D areas when performing activities considered to be a contamination risk
           as defined by the CCS.

7.14      Cleanroom gowning should be performed in change rooms of an appropriate
          cleanliness grade to ensure gown cleanliness is maintained. Outdoor clothing
          including socks (other than personal underwear) should not be brought into
          changing rooms leading directly to grade B and C areas. Single or two-piece
          facility trouser suits, covering the full length of the arms and the legs, and facility
          socks covering the feet, should be worn before entry to change rooms for grades
          B and C. Facility suits and socks should not present a risk of contamination to the
          gowning area or processes.

7.15      Every operator entering grade B or A areas should gown into clean, sterilised
          protective garments (including eye coverings and masks) of an appropriate size
          at each entry. The maximum period for which the sterilised gown may be worn
          before replacement during a shift should be defined as part of the garment
          qualification.

7.16      Gloves should be regularly disinfected during operations. Garments and gloves
          should be changed immediately if they become damaged and present any risk of
          product contamination.

7.17      Reusable clean area clothing should be cleaned in a laundry facility adequately
          segregated from production operations, using a qualified process ensuring that
          the clothing is not damaged and/or contaminated by fibres or particles during the
          repeated laundry process. Laundry facilities used should not introduce risk of
          contamination or cross-contamination. Inappropriate handling and use of clothing
          may damage fibres and increase the risk of shedding of particles. After washing
          and before packing, garments should be visually inspected for damage and visual
          cleanliness. The garment management processes should be evaluated and
          determined as part of the garment qualification programme and should include a
          maximum number of laundry and sterilisation cycles.

7.18      Activities in clean areas that are not critical to the production processes should
          be kept to a minimum, especially when aseptic operations are in progress.
          Movement of personnel should be slow, controlled and methodical to avoid
          excessive shedding of particles and organisms due to over-vigorous activity.
          Operators performing aseptic operations should adhere to aseptic technique at
          all times to prevent changes in air currents that may introduce air of lower quality
          into the critical zone. Movement adjacent to the critical zone should be restricted
          and the obstruction of the path of the unidirectional (first air) airflow should be
          avoided. A review of airflow visualisation studies should be considered as part of
          the training programme.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                           -23-                             25 August 2023
                                      Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products




8      Production and Specific Technologies
TERMINALLY STERILISED PRODUCTS

8.1    Preparation of components and materials should be performed in at least a
       grade D cleanroom in order to limit the risk of microbial, endotoxin/pyrogen and
       particle contamination, so that the product is suitable for sterilisation. Where the
       product is at a high or unusual risk of microbial contamination (e.g. the product
       actively supports microbial growth, the product must be held for long periods
       before filling or the product is not processed mostly in closed vessels), then
       preparation should be carried out in at least a grade C environment. Preparation
       of ointments, creams, suspensions and emulsions should be carried out in at
       least a grade C environment before terminal sterilisation. Specific guidance
       regarding terminally sterilised veterinary medicinal products can be found within
       Annex 4 of the GMP Guide.

8.2    Primary packaging containers and components should be cleaned using
       validated processes to ensure that particle, endotoxin/pyrogen and bioburden
       contamination is appropriately controlled.

8.3    Filling of products for terminal sterilisation should be carried out in at least a
       grade C environment.

8.4    Where the CCS identifies that the product is at an unusual risk of contamination
       from the environment because, for example, the filling operation is slow, the
       containers are wide necked or are necessarily exposed for more than a few seconds
       before closing, then the product should be filled in grade A with at least a grade C
       background.

8.5    Processing of the bulk solution should include a filtration step with a
       microorganism retaining filter, where possible, to reduce bioburden levels and
       particles prior to filling into the final product containers and there should be a
       maximum permissible time between preparation and filling.

8.6    Examples of operations to be carried out in the various grades are given in
       Table 3.

Table 3: Examples of operations and grades for terminally sterilised preparation and
       processing operations

      Grade A    -     Filling of products, when unusually at risk.
      Grade C    -     Preparation of solutions, when unusually at risk.
                 -     Filling of products.
      Grade D    -     Preparation of solutions and components for subsequent filling.


ASEPTIC PREPARATION AND PROCESSING

8.7    The aseptic process should be clearly defined. The risks associated with the
       aseptic process, and any associated requirements, should be identified,
       assessed and appropriately controlled. The site’s CCS should clearly define the


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                          -24-                             25 August 2023
                                      Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       acceptance criteria for these controls, requirements for monitoring and the review
       of their effectiveness. Methods and procedures to control these risks should be
       described and implemented. Accepted residual risks should be formally
       documented.

8.8    Precautions to minimize microbial, endotoxin/pyrogenic and particle
       contamination should be taken, as per the site’s CCS, during the preparation
       of the aseptic environment, during all processing stages (including the stages
       before and after bulk product sterilisation), and until the product is sealed in its final
       container. The presence of materials liable to generate particles and fibres should
       be minimized in cleanrooms.

8.9    Where possible, the use of equipment such as RABS, isolators or other systems,
       should be considered in order to reduce the need for critical interventions into
       grade A and to minimize the risk of contamination. Robotics and automation of
       processes can also be considered to eliminate direct human critical interventions
       (e.g. dry heat tunnel, automated lyophilizer loading, sterilisation in place).

8.10   Examples of operations to be carried out in the various environmental grades are
       given in Table 4.

Table 4:   Examples of operations and grades for aseptic preparation and processing
           operations

            -   Aseptic assembly of filling equipment.
            -   Connections made under aseptic conditions (where sterilised product contact
                surfaces are exposed) that are post the final sterilising grade filter. These
                connections should be sterilised by steam-in-place whenever possible.
            -   Aseptic compounding and mixing.
            -   Replenishment of sterile bulk product, containers and closures.
 Grade A    -   Removal and cooling of unprotected (e.g. with no packaging) items from
                sterilisers.
            -   Staging and conveying of sterile primary packaging components in the aseptic
                filling line while not wrapped.
            -   Aseptic filling, sealing of containers such as ampoules, vial closure, transfer of
                open or partially stoppered vials.
            -   Loading of a lyophilizer.

            -   Background support for grade A (when not in an isolator).
 Grade B    -   Conveying or staging, while protected from the surrounding environment, of
                equipment, components and ancillary items for introduction into grade A.

 Grade C    -   Preparation of solutions to be filtered including sampling and dispensing.

            -   Cleaning of equipment.
            -   Handling of components, equipment and accessories after cleaning.
 Grade D    -   Assembly under HEPA filtered airflow of cleaned components, equipment and
                accessories prior to sterilisation.
            -   Assembly of closed and sterilised SUS using intrinsic sterile connection
                devices.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                          -25-                              25 August 2023
                                         Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



8.11        For sterile products where the final formulation cannot be filtered, the following
            should be considered:

       i.    all product and component contact equipment should be sterilised prior to use,

   ii.       all raw materials or intermediates should be sterilised and aseptically added,

   iii.      bulk solutions or intermediates should be sterilised.

8.12        The unwrapping, assembly and preparation of sterilised equipment, components
            and ancillary items with direct or indirect product contact should be treated as an
            aseptic process and performed in grade A with a grade B background. The filling
            line set-up and filling of the sterile product should be treated as an aseptic process
            and performed in grade A with a grade B background. Where an isolator is used,
            the background should be in accordance with paragraph 4.20.

8.13        Preparation and filling of sterile products such as ointments, creams,
            suspensions and emulsions should be performed in grade A with a grade B
            background when the product and components are exposed to the environment
            and the product is not subsequently filtered (via a sterilising grade filter) or
            terminally sterilised. Where an isolator or RABS is used, the background should
            be in accordance with paragraph 4.20.

8.14        Aseptic connections should be performed in grade A with a grade B background
            unless subsequently sterilised in place or conducted with intrinsic sterile
            connection devices that minimize any potential contamination from the immediate
            environment. Intrinsic sterile connection devices should be designed to mitigate
            risk of contamination.

            Where an isolator is used, the background should be in accordance with
            paragraph 4.20. Aseptic connections should be appropriately assessed and their
            effectiveness verified. For requirements regarding intrinsic sterile connection
            devices, see paragraphs 8.129 and 8.130.

8.15        Aseptic manipulations (including non-intrinsic sterile connection devices) should
            be minimized through the use of engineering design solutions such as
            preassembled and sterilised equipment. Whenever feasible, product contact
            piping and equipment should be pre-assembled, and sterilised in place.

8.16        There should be an authorized list of allowed and qualified interventions, both
            inherent and corrective, that may occur during production (see paragraph 9.34).
            Interventions should be carefully designed to ensure that the risk of
            contamination of the environment, process and product is effectively minimized.
            The process of designing interventions should include the consideration of any
            impact on air-flows and critical surfaces and products. Engineering solutions
            should be used whenever possible to minimize incursion by operators during the
            intervention. Aseptic technique should be observed at all times, including the
            appropriate use of sterile tools for manipulations. The procedures listing the types
            of inherent and corrective interventions, and how to perform them, should be first
            evaluated via risk management and APS and be kept up to date. Non-qualified
            interventions should only be used in exceptional circumstances, with due
            consideration of the risks associated with the intervention and with the
            authorisation of the quality unit. The details of the intervention conducted should


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                             -26-                            25 August 2023
                                          Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



            be subject to risk assessment, recorded and fully investigated under the
            manufacturer's PQS. Any non-qualified interventions should be thoroughly
            assessed by the quality department and considered during batch disposition.

8.17        Interventions and stoppages should be recorded in the batch record. Each line
            stoppage or intervention should be sufficiently documented in batch records with
            the associated time, duration of the event, and operators involved (ref to
            paragraph 9.34).

8.18        The duration of each aspect of aseptic preparation and processing should be
            minimized and limited to a defined and validated maximum time, including:

       i.    the holding time between equipment, component, and container cleaning,
             drying and sterilisation;

   ii.       the holding time for sterilised equipment, components, and containers before
             use and during filling/assembly;

   iii.      the holding time for a decontaminated environment, such as the RABS or
             isolator before use;

   iv.       the time between the start of the preparation of a product and its sterilisation or
             filtration through a microorganism-retaining filter (if applicable), through to the
             end of the aseptic filling process There should be a maximum permissible time
             for each product that takes into account its composition and the prescribed
             method of storage;

   v.        the holding time for sterilised product prior to filling;

   vi.       the aseptic processing time;

  vii.       the filling time.

8.19        Aseptic operations (including APS) should be observed on a regular basis by
            personnel with specific expertise in aseptic processing to verify the correct
            performance of operations including operator behaviour in the cleanroom and
            address inappropriate practices if detected.


FINISHING OF STERILE PRODUCTS

8.20        Open primary packaging containers should be maintained under grade A
            conditions with the appropriate background for the technology as described in
            paragraph 4.20. For partially stoppered vials or prefilled syringes (see paragraph
            8.126).

8.21        Final containers should be closed by appropriately validated methods.

8.22        Where final containers are closed by fusion, e.g. Blow-Fill-Seal (BFS), Form-Fill-
            Seal (FFS), Small and Large Volume Parenteral (SVP & LVP) bags, glass or
            plastic ampoules, the critical parameters and variables that affect seal integrity
            should be evaluated, determined, effectively controlled and monitored during
            operations. Glass ampoules, BFS units and small volume containers (≤100 ml)


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                              -27-                            25 August 2023
                                   Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       closed by fusion should be subject to 100% integrity testing using validated
       methods. For large volume containers (>100 ml) closed by fusion, reduced
       sampling may be acceptable where scientifically justified and based on data
       demonstrating the consistency of the existing process, and a high level of process
       control. It should be noted that visual inspection is not considered as an
       acceptable integrity test method.

8.23   Samples of products using systems other than fusion should be taken and
       checked for integrity using validated methods. The frequency of testing should
       be based on the knowledge and experience of the container and closure systems
       being used. A scientifically justified sampling plan should be used. The sample
       size should be based on information such as supplier management, packaging
       component specifications and process knowledge.

8.24   Containers sealed under vacuum should be tested for maintenance of vacuum
       after an appropriate pre-determined period prior to certification/release and during
       shelf life.

8.25   The container closure integrity validation should take into consideration any
       transportation or shipping requirements that may negatively impact the integrity
       of the container (e.g. by decompression or extreme temperatures).

8.26   Where the equipment used to crimp vial caps can generate large quantities of
       non-viable particle, measures to prevent particle contamination such as locating
       the equipment at a physically separate station equipped with adequate air
       extraction should be taken.

8.27   Vial capping of aseptically filled products can be undertaken as an aseptic
       process using sterilised caps or as a clean process outside the aseptic
       processing area. Where the latter approach is adopted, vials should be
       protected by grade A conditions up to the point of leaving the aseptic processing
       area, and thereafter stoppered vials should be protected with a grade A air supply
       until the cap has been crimped. The supporting background environment of grade
       A air supply should meet at least grade D requirements. Where capping is a
       manual process, it should be performed under grade A conditions either in an
       appropriately designed isolator or in grade A with a grade B background.

8.28   Where capping of aseptically filled sterile product is conducted as a clean process
       with grade A air supply protection, vials with missing or displaced stoppers
       should be rejected prior to capping. Appropriately qualified, automated methods
       for stopper height detection should be in place.

8.29   Where human intervention is required at the capping station, appropriate
       technological and organizational measures should be used to prevent direct
       contact with the vials and to minimize contamination. RABS and isolators may be
       beneficial in assuring the required conditions.

8.30   All filled containers of parenteral products should be inspected individually for
       extraneous contamination or other defects. Defect classification and criticality
       should be determined during qualification and based on risk and historical
       knowledge. Factors to consider include, but are not limited to, the potential impact
       of the defect to the patient and the route of administration. Different defect types
       should be categorized and batch performance analysed. Batches with unusual


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -28-                            25 August 2023
                                    Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       levels of defects, when compared with routine defect numbers for the process
       (based on routine and trend data), should be investigated. A defect library should
       be generated and maintained which captures all known classes of defects. The
       defect library should be used for the training of production and quality assurance
       personnel. Critical defects should not be identified during any subsequent
       sampling and inspection of acceptable containers. Any critical defect identified
       subsequently should trigger an investigation as it indicates a possible failure of
       the original inspection process.

8.31   When inspection is performed manually, it should be conducted under suitable
       and controlled conditions of illumination and background. Inspection rates should
       be appropriately controlled and qualified. Operators performing the inspection
       should undergo visual inspection qualification (whilst wearing corrective lenses, if
       these are normally worn) at least annually. The qualification should be
       undertaken using appropriate samples from the manufacturer's defect library sets
       and taking into consideration worst case scenarios (e.g. inspection time, line
       speed where the product is transferred to the operator by a conveyor system,
       container size or fatigue) and should include consideration of eyesight checks.
       Operator distractions should be minimized and frequent breaks, of an appropriate
       duration, should be taken from inspection.

8.32   Where automated methods of inspection are used, the process should be
       validated to detect known defects (which may impact product quality or safety)
       and be equal to, or better than, manual inspection methods. The performance of
       the equipment should be challenged using representative defects prior to start up
       and at regular intervals throughout the batch.

8.33   Results of the inspection should be recorded and defect types and numbers
       trended. Reject levels for the various defect types should also be trended based
       on statistical principles. Impact to product on the market should be assessed as
       part of the investigation when adverse trends are observed.


STERILISATION

8.34   Where possible, finished product should be terminally sterilised, using a validated
       and controlled sterilisation process, as this provides a greater assurance of
       sterility than a validated and controlled sterile filtration process and/or aseptic
       processing. Where it is not possible for a product to undergo terminal sterilisation,
       consideration should be given to using post-aseptic processing terminal heat
       treatment, combined with aseptic process to give improved sterility assurance.

8.35   The selection, design and location of the equipment and cycle/programme used
       for sterilisation should be based on scientific principles and data which
       demonstrate repeatability and reliability of the sterilisation process. All
       parameters should be defined, and where critical, these should be controlled,
       monitored and recorded.

8.36   All sterilisation processes should be validated. Validation studies should take into
       account the product composition, storage conditions and maximum time between
       the start of the preparation of a product or material to be sterilised and its
       sterilisation. Before any sterilisation process is adopted, its suitability for the
       product and equipment, and its efficacy in consistently achieving the desired


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -29-                            25 August 2023
                                    Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       sterilising conditions in all parts of each type of load to be processed should be
       validated notably by physical measurements and where appropriate by Biological
       Indicators (BI). For effective sterilisation, the whole of the product, and surfaces
       of equipment and components should be subject to the required treatment and
       the process should be designed to ensure that this is achieved.

8.37   Particular attention should be given when the adopted product sterilisation
       method is not described in the current edition of the Pharmacopoeia, or when it
       is used for a product which is not a simple aqueous solution. Where possible,
       heat sterilisation is the method of choice.

8.38   Validated loading patterns should be established for all sterilisation processes
       and load patterns should be subject to periodic revalidation. Maximum and
       minimum loads should also be considered as part of the overall load validation
       strategy.

8.39   The validity of the sterilizing process should be reviewed and verified at
       scheduled intervals based on risk. Heat sterilization cycles should be revalidated
       with a minimum frequency of at least annually for load patterns that are
       considered worst case. Other load patterns should be validated at a frequency
       justified in the CCS.

8.40   Routine operating parameters should be established and adhered to for all
       sterilisation processes, e.g. physical parameters and loading patterns.

8.41   There should be mechanisms in place to detect a sterilisation cycle that does not
       conform to the validated parameters. Any failed sterilisation or sterilisation that
       deviated from the validated process (e.g. have longer or shorter phases such as
       heating cycles) should be investigated.

8.42   Suitable BIs placed at appropriate locations should be considered as an
       additional method to support the validation of the sterilisation process. BIs should
       be stored and used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Where BIs are
       used to support validation and/or to monitor a sterilisation process (e.g. with
       ethylene oxide), positive controls should be tested for each sterilisation cycle. If
       BIs are used, strict precautions should be taken to avoid transferring microbial
       contamination to the manufacturing or other testing processes. BI results in
       isolation should not be used to override other critical parameters and process
       design elements.

8.43   The reliability of BIs is important. Suppliers should be qualified and transportation
       and storage conditions should be controlled in order that BI quality is not
       compromised. Prior to use of a new batch/lot of BIs, the population, purity and
       identity of the indicator organism of the batch/lot should be verified. For other
       critical parameters, e.g. D-value, Z-value, the batch certificate provided by the
       qualified supplier can normally be used.

8.44   There should be a clear means of differentiating products, equipment and
       components, which have not been subjected to the sterilisation process from
       those which have. Equipment such as baskets or trays used to carry products,
       other items of equipment and/or components should be clearly labelled (or
       electronically tracked) with the product name and batch number and an indication
       of whether or not it has been sterilised. Indicators such as autoclave tape, or


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -30-                            25 August 2023
                                    Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       irradiation indicators may be used, where appropriate, to indicate whether or not
       a batch (or sub-batch material, component, equipment) has passed through a
       sterilisation process. However, these indicators show only that the sterilisation
       process has occurred; they do not indicate product sterility or achievement of the
       required sterility assurance level.

8.45   Sterilisation records should be available for each sterilisation run. Each cycle
       should have a unique identifier. Their conformity should be reviewed and
       approved as part of the batch certification/release procedure.

8.46   Where required, materials, equipment and components should be sterilised by
       validated methods appropriate to the specific material. Suitable protection after
       sterilisation should be provided to prevent recontamination. If sterilised items are
       not used immediately after sterilisation, these should be stored using
       appropriately sealed packaging and a maximum hold time should be established.
       Where justified, components that have been packaged with multiple sterile
       packaging layers need not be stored in a cleanroom if the integrity and
       configuration of the sterile pack allows the items to be readily disinfected during
       transfer by operators into grade A (e.g. by the use of multiple sterile coverings
       that can be removed at each transfer from lower to higher grade). Where
       protection is achieved by containment in sealed packaging, this packaging
       process should be undertaken prior to sterilisation.

8.47   Where materials, equipment, components and ancillary items are sterilised in
       sealed packaging and then transferred into grade A, this should be done using
       appropriate validated methods (for example, airlocks or pass-through hatches)
       with accompanying disinfection of the exterior of the sealed packaging. The use
       of rapid transfer port technology should also be considered. These methods
       should be demonstrated to effectively control the potential risk of contamination
       of the grade A and grade B areas and, likewise, the disinfection procedure should
       be demonstrated to be effective in reducing any contamination on the packaging
       to acceptable levels for entry of the item into the grade B and grade A areas.

8.48   Where materials, equipment, components and ancillary items are sterilised in
       sealed packaging or containers, the packaging should be qualified for minimizing
       the risk of particulate, microbial, endotoxin/pyrogen or chemical contamination,
       and for compatibility with the selected sterilisation method. The packaging sealing
       process should be validated. The validation should consider the integrity of the
       sterile protective barrier system, the maximum hold time before sterilisation and
       the maximum shelf life assigned to the sterilised items. The integrity of the sterile
       protective barrier system for each of the sterilised items should be checked prior
       to use.

8.49   For materials, equipment, components and ancillary items that are not a direct or
       indirect product contact part and are necessary for aseptic processing but cannot
       be sterilised, an effective and validated disinfection and transfer process should
       be in place. These items, once disinfected, should be protected to prevent
       recontamination. These items, and others representing potential routes of
       contamination, should be included in the environmental monitoring programme.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -31-                            25 August 2023
                                   Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



STERILISATION BY HEAT

8.50   Each heat sterilisation cycle should be recorded either electronically or by
       hardcopy, using equipment with suitable accuracy and precision. The system
       should have safeguards and/or redundancy in its control and monitoring
       instrumentation to detect a cycle not conforming to the validated cycle parameter
       requirements and abort or fail this cycle (e.g. by the use of duplex/double probes
       connected to independent control and monitoring systems).

8.51   The position of the temperature probes used for controlling and/or recording
       should be determined during the validation and selected based on system design
       and in order to correctly record and represent routine cycle conditions. Validation
       studies should be designed to demonstrate the suitability of system control and
       recording probe locations, and should include the verification of the function and
       location of these probes by the use of an independent monitoring probe located
       at the same position during validation.

8.52   The whole of the load should reach the required temperature before
       measurement of the sterilising time-period starts. For sterilisation cycles
       controlled by using a reference probe within the load, specific consideration
       should be given to ensuring the load probe temperature is controlled within
       defined temperature range prior to cycle commencement.

8.53   After completion of the high temperature phase of a heat sterilisation cycle,
       precautions should be taken against contamination of a sterilised load during
       cooling. Any cooling liquid or gas that comes into contact with the product or
       sterilised material should be sterilised.

8.54   In those cases where parametric release has been authorized, a robust system
       should be applied to the product lifecycle validation and the routine monitoring of
       the manufacturing process. This system should be periodically reviewed. Further
       guidance regarding parametric release is provided in Annex 17.


MOIST HEAT STERILISATION

8.55   Moist heat sterilisation can be achieved using steam, (direct or indirect contact),
       but also includes other systems such as superheated water systems (cascade or
       immersion cycles) that could be used for containers that may be damaged by
       other cycle designs (e.g. Blow-Fill-Seal containers, plastic bags).

8.56   The items to be sterilised, other than products in sealed containers, should be dry,
       packaged in a protective barrier system which allows removal of air and
       penetration of steam and prevents recontamination after sterilisation. All loaded
       items should be dry upon removal from the steriliser. Load dryness should be
       confirmed by visual inspection as a part of the sterilisation process acceptance.

8.57   For porous cycles (hard goods), time, temperature and pressure should be used
       to monitor the process and be recorded. Each sterilised item should be inspected
       for damage, packaging material integrity and moisture on removal from the
       autoclave. Any item found not to be fit for purpose should be removed from the
       manufacturing area and an investigation performed.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -32-                            25 August 2023
                                   Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



8.58   For autoclaves capable of performing prevacuum sterilisation cycles, the
       temperature should be recorded at the chamber drain throughout the sterilisation
       period. Load probes may also be used where appropriate but the controlling
       system should remain related to the load validation. For steam in place systems,
       the temperature should be recorded at appropriate condensate drain locations
       throughout the sterilisation period.

8.59   Validation of porous cycles should include a calculation of equilibration time,
       exposure time, correlation of pressure and temperature and the
       minimum/maximum temperature range during exposure. Validation of fluid cycles
       should include temperature, time and/or F0. Critical processing parameters
       should be subject to defined limits (including appropriate tolerances) and be
       confirmed as part of the sterilisation validation and routine cycle acceptance
       criteria.

8.60   Leak tests on the steriliser should be carried out periodically (normally weekly)
       when a vacuum phase is part of the cycle or the system is returned, post-
       sterilisation, to a pressure lower than the environment surrounding the steriliser.

8.61   There should be adequate assurance of air removal prior to and during
       sterilisation when the sterilisation process includes air purging (e.g. porous
       autoclave loads, lyophilizer chambers). For autoclaves, this should include an air
       removal test cycle (normally performed on a daily basis) or the use of an air
       detector system. Loads to be sterilised should be designed to support effective
       air removal and be free draining to prevent the build-up of condensate.

8.62   Distortion and damage of non-rigid containers that are terminally sterilised, such
       as containers produced by Blow-Fill-Seal or Form-Fill-Seal technologies, should
       be prevented by appropriate cycle design and control (for instance setting correct
       pressure, heating and cooling rates and loading patterns).

8.63   Where steam in place systems are used for sterilisation (e.g. for fixed pipework,
       vessels and lyophilizer chambers), the system should be appropriately designed
       and validated to assure all parts of the system are subjected to the required
       treatment. The system should be monitored for temperature, pressure and time
       at appropriate locations during routine use to ensure all areas are effectively and
       reproducibly sterilised. These locations should be demonstrated as being
       representative of, and correlated with, the slowest to heat locations during initial
       and routine validation. Once a system has been sterilised by steam in place, it
       should remain integral and where operations require, maintained under positive
       pressure or otherwise equipped with a sterilising vent filter prior to use.

8.64   In fluids load cycles where superheated water is used as the heat transfer
       medium, the heated water should consistently reach all of the required contact
       points. Initial qualification studies should include temperature mapping of the
       entire load. There should be routine checks on the equipment to ensure that
       nozzles (where the water is introduced) are not blocked and drains remain free
       from debris.

8.65   Validation of the sterilisation of fluids loads in a superheated water autoclave
       should include temperature mapping of the entire load and heat penetration and
       reproducibility studies. All parts of the load should heat up uniformly and achieve
       the desired temperature for the specified time. Routine temperature monitoring


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -33-                            25 August 2023
                                         Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



            probes should be correlated to the worst case positions identified during the
            qualification process.


DRY HEAT STERILISATION

8.66        Dry heat sterilisation utilizes high temperatures of air or gas to sterilise a product
            or article. Dry heat sterilisation is of particular use in the thermal removal of
            difficult-to-eliminate thermally robust contaminants such as endotoxin/pyrogen
            and is often used in the preparation of components for aseptic filling. The
            combination of time and temperature to which product, components or equipment
            are exposed should produce an adequate and reproducible level of lethality
            and/or endotoxin/pyrogen inactivation/removal when operated routinely within
            the established limits. The process may be operated in an oven or in a continuous
            tunnel process, e.g. for sterilisation and depyrogenation of glass containers.

8.67        Dry heat sterilisation/depyrogenation tunnels should be configured to ensure that
            airflow protects the integrity and performance of the grade A sterilising zone by
            maintaining appropriate pressure differentials and airflow through the tunnel. Air
            pressure difference profiles should be assessed. The impact of any airflow
            change should be assessed to ensure the heating profile is maintained. All air
            supplied to the tunnel should pass through at least a HEPA filter and periodic
            tests (at least biannually) should be performed to demonstrate air filter integrity.
            Any tunnel parts that come into contact with sterilised components should be
            appropriately sterilised or disinfected. Critical process parameters that should be
            considered during validation and/or routine processing should include, but are
            not limited to:

       i.    belt speed or dwell time within the sterilising zone,

   ii.       temperature – minimum and maximum temperatures,

   iii.      heat penetration of the material/article,

   iv.       heat distribution/uniformity,

   v.        airflows determined by air pressure difference profiles correlated with the heat
             distribution and penetration studies.

8.68        When a thermal process is used as part of the depyrogenation process for any
            component or product contact equipment/material, validation studies should be
            performed to demonstrate that the process provides a suitable Fh value and
            results in a minimum 3 log10 reduction in endotoxin concentration. When this is
            attained, there is no additional requirement to demonstrate sterilisation in these
            cases.

8.69        Containers spiked with endotoxin should be used during validation and should be
            carefully managed with a full reconciliation performed. Containers should be
            representative of the materials normally processed (in respect to composition of
            the packaging materials, porosity, dimensions, nominal volume). Endotoxin
            quantification and recovery efficiency should also be demonstrated.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                             -34-                            25 August 2023
                                            Annex 1      Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



8.70        Dry heat ovens are typically employed to sterilise or depyrogenate primary
            packaging components, starting materials or active substances but may be used
            for other processes. They should be maintained at a positive pressure relative to
            lower grade clean areas throughout the sterilisation and post sterilisation hold
            process unless the integrity of the packaging is maintained. All air entering the
            oven should pass through a HEPA filter. Critical process parameters that should
            be considered in qualification and/or routine processing should include, but are
            not limited to:

       i.    temperature,

    ii.      exposure period/time,

   iii.      chamber pressure (for maintenance of over pressure),

   iv.       air speed,

    v.       air quality within the oven,

   vi.       heat penetration of material/article (slow to heat spots),

  vii.       heat distribution/uniformity,

  viii.      load pattern and configuration of articles to be sterilised/depyrogenated
             including minimum and maximum loads.


STERILISATION BY RADIATION

8.71        Sterilisation by radiation is used mainly for the sterilisation of heat sensitive
            materials and products. Ultraviolet irradiation is not an acceptable method of
            sterilisation. Guidance regarding ionising radiation sterilisation can be found
            within Annex 12.

8.72        Validation procedures should ensure that the effects of variation in density of the
            product and packages are considered.


STERILISATION WITH ETHYLENE OXIDE

8.73        This method should only be used when no other method is practicable. During
            process validation, it should be shown that there is no damaging effect on the
            product and that the conditions and time allowed for degassing result in the
            reduction of any residual ethylene oxide (EO) gas and reaction products to
            defined acceptable limits for the given product or material.

8.74        Direct contact between gas and microbial cells is essential, precautions should
            be taken to avoid the presence of organisms likely to be enclosed in material
            such as crystals or dried protein. The nature, porosity and quantity of packaging
            materials can significantly affect the process.

8.75        Before exposure to the gas, materials should be brought into equilibrium
            with the humidity and temperature required by the process. Where steam is


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                              -35-                            25 August 2023
                                         Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



            used to condition the load for sterilisation, it should be of an appropriate quality.
            The time required for this should be balanced against the opposing need to
            minimize the time before sterilisation.

8.76        Each sterilisation cycle should be monitored with suitable BIs, using the
            appropriate number of test units distributed throughout the load at defined
            locations that have been shown to be worst case locations during validation.

8.77        Critical process parameters that could be considered as part of the sterilisation
            process validation and routine monitoring include, but are not limited to:

       i.    EO gas concentration,

   ii.       pressure,

   iii.      amount of EO gas used,

   iv.       relative humidity,

   v.        temperature,

   vi.       exposure time.

8.78        After sterilisation, the load should be aerated to allow EO gas and/or its reaction
            products to desorb from the packaged product to predetermined levels. Aeration
            can occur within a steriliser chamber and/or in a separate aeration chamber or
            aeration room. The aeration phase should be validated as part of the overall EO
            sterilisation process validation.


FILTER STERILISATION OF PRODUCTS WHICH CANNOT BE STERILISED IN
THEIR FINAL CONTAINER

8.79        If the product cannot be sterilised in its final container, solutions or liquids should
            be sterilised by filtration through a sterile sterilising grade filter (with a nominal
            pore size of a maximum of 0.22 µm that has been appropriately validated to
            obtain a sterile filtrate) and subsequently aseptically filled into a previously
            sterilised container. The selection of the filter used should ensure that it is
            compatible with the product and as described in the marketing authorization (see
            paragraph 8.135).

8.80        Suitable bioburden reduction prefilters and/or sterilising grade filters may be used
            at multiple points during the manufacturing process to ensure a low and
            controlled bioburden of the liquid prior to the final sterilising filter. Due to the
            potential additional risks of a sterile filtration process, as compared with other
            sterilisation processes, an additional filtration through a sterile sterilising grade
            filter, as close to the point of fill as possible, should be considered as part of an
            overall CCS.

8.81        The selection of components for the filtration system and their interconnection
            and arrangement within the filtration system, including pre-filters, should be
            based on the critical quality attributes of the product, justified and documented.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                             -36-                             25 August 2023
                                               Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



            The filtration system should minimize the generation of fibres and particles, not
            cause or contribute to unacceptable levels of impurities, or possess
            characteristics that otherwise alter the quality and efficacy of the product.
            Similarly, the filter characteristics should be compatible with the fluid and not be
            adversely affected by the product to be filtered. Adsorption of product
            components and extraction/leaching of filter components should be evaluated
            (see paragraph 8.135).

8.82        The filtration system should be designed to:

       i.        allow operation within validated process parameters;

   ii.           maintain the sterility of the filtrate;

   iii.          minimize the number of aseptic connections required between the final
                 sterilising grade filter and the final filling of the product;

   iv.           allow cleaning procedures to be conducted as necessary;

   v.            allow sterilisation procedures, including sterilisation in place, to be conducted
                 as necessary;

   vi.           permit in-place integrity testing, of the 0.22 µm final sterilising grade filter,
                 preferably as a closed system, both prior to, and following filtration as
                 necessary. In-place integrity testing methods should be selected to avoid any
                 adverse impact on the quality of the product.

8.83        Sterile filtration of liquids should be validated in accordance with relevant
            Pharmacopeia requirements. Validation can be grouped by different strengths or
            variations of a product but should be done under worst case conditions. The
            rationale for grouping should be justified and documented.

8.84        During filter validation, wherever possible, the product to be filtered should be
            used for bacterial retention testing of the sterilising grade filter. Where the product
            to be filtered is not suitable for use in bacterial retention testing, a suitable
            surrogate product should be justified for use in the test. The challenge organism
            used in the bacterial retention test should be justified.

8.85        Filtration parameters that should be considered and established during validation
            should include, but are not limited to:

            i.      The wetting fluid used for filter integrity testing:

                     It should be based on the filter manufacturer’s recommendation or the fluid
                      to be filtered. The appropriate integrity test value specification should be
                      established.
                     If the system is flushed or integrity tested in-situ with a fluid other than the
                      product, appropriate actions are taken to avoid any deleterious effect on
                      product quality.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                                   -37-                            25 August 2023
                                        Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       ii.   Filtration process conditions including:

              fluid pre-filtration holding time and effect on bioburden,

              filter conditioning, with fluid if necessary,

              maximum filtration time/total time filter is in contact with the fluid,

              maximum operating pressure,

              flow rate,

              maximum filtration volume,

              temperature,

              the time taken to filter a known volume of bulk solution and the pressure
               difference to be used across the filter.

8.86   Routine process controls should be implemented to ensure adherence to
       validated filtration parameters. Results of critical process parameters should be
       included in the batch record, including but not limited to the minimum time taken
       to filter a known volume of bulk solution and pressure difference across the filter.
       Any significant difference from critical parameters during manufacturing should
       be documented and investigated.

8.87   The integrity of the sterilised filter assembly should be verified by integrity testing
       before use (pre-use post sterilisation integrity test or PUPSIT), to check for
       damage and loss of integrity caused by the filter preparation prior to use. A
       sterilising grade filter that is used to sterilise a fluid should be subject to a non-
       destructive integrity test post-use prior to removal of the filter from its housing.
       The integrity test process should be validated and test results should correlate to
       the microbial retention capability of the filter established during validation.
       Examples of tests that are used include bubble point, diffusive flow, water
       intrusion or pressure hold test. It is recognized that PUPSIT may not always be
       possible after sterilisation due to process constraints (e.g. the filtration of very
       small volumes of solution). In these cases, an alternative approach may be taken
       providing that a thorough risk assessment has been performed and compliance
       is achieved by the implementation of appropriate controls to mitigate any risk of
       a non-integral filtration system. Points to consider in such a risk assessment
       should include but are not limited to:

       i.    in depth knowledge and control of the filter sterilisation process to ensure
             that the potential for damage to the filter is minimized,

       ii.   in depth knowledge and control of the supply chain to include:

                contract sterilisation facilities,
                defined transport mechanisms,
                packaging of the sterilised filter, to prevent damage to the filter during
                 transportation and storage.


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                            -38-                            25 August 2023
                                        Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products




       iii.   in depth process knowledge such as:

                 the specific product type, including particle burden and whether there
                  exists any risk of impact on filter integrity values, such as the potential to
                  alter integrity-testing values and therefore prevent the detection of a non-
                  integral filter during a post-use filter integrity test; and
                 pre-filtration and processing steps, prior to the final sterilising grade filter,
                  which would remove particle burden and clarify the product prior to the
                  sterile filtration.

8.88    The integrity of critical sterile gas and air vent filters (that are directly linked to the
        sterility of the product) should be verified by testing after use, with the filter
        remaining in the filter assembly or housing.

8.89    The integrity of non-critical air or gas vent filters should be confirmed and
        recorded at appropriate intervals. Where gas filters are in place for extended
        periods, integrity testing should be carried out at installation and prior to
        replacement. The maximum duration of use should be specified and monitored
        based on risk (e.g. considering the maximum number of uses and heat treatment/
        sterilisation cycles permitted as applicable).

8.90    For gas filtration, unintended moistening or wetting of the filter or filter equipment
        should be avoided.

8.91    If the sterilising filtration process has been validated as a system consisting of
        multiple filters to achieve the sterility for a given fluid, the filtration system is
        considered to be a single sterilising unit and all filters within the system should
        satisfactorily pass integrity testing after use.

8.92    In a redundant filtration system (where a second redundant sterilising grade filter
        is present as a backup but the sterilising process is validated as only requiring
        one filter), post-use integrity test of the primary sterilising grade filter should be
        performed and if demonstrated to be integral, then a post-use integrity test of the
        redundant (backup) filter is not necessary. However, in the event of a failure of
        the post-use integrity test on the primary filter, post-use integrity test on the
        secondary (redundant) filter should be performed, in conjunction with an
        investigation and risk assessment to determine the reason for the primary filter
        test failure.

8.93    Bioburden samples should be taken from the bulk product and immediately prior
        to the final sterile filtration. In case where a redundant filtration set-up is used, it
        should be taken prior to the first filter. Systems for taking samples should be
        designed so as not to introduce contamination.

8.94    Liquid sterilising grade filters should be discarded after the processing of a single
        batch and the same filter should not be used continuously for more than one
        working day unless such use has been validated.
8.95    Where campaign manufacture of a product has been appropriately justified in the
        CCS and validated, the filter user should:




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                            -39-                             25 August 2023
                                       Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



        i.    assess and document the risks associated with the duration of filter use for
              the sterile filtration process for a given fluid;
       ii.    conduct and document effective validation and qualification studies to
              demonstrate that the duration of filter use for a given sterile filtration process
              and for a given fluid does not compromise performance of the final sterilising
              grade filter or filtrate quality;
       iii.   document the maximum validated duration of use for the filter and implement
              controls to ensure that filters are not used beyond the validated maximum
              duration. Records of these controls should be maintained;
       iv.    implement controls to ensure that filters contaminated with fluid or cleaning
              agent residues, or considered defective in any other way, are removed from
              use.


FORM-FILL-SEAL (FFS)

8.96    The conditions for FFS machines used for terminally sterilised products should
        comply with the environmental requirements of paragraphs 8.3 and 8.4 of this
        Annex. The conditions for FFS machines used in aseptic manufacture should
        comply with the environmental requirements of paragraph 8.10 of this Annex.

8.97    Contamination of the packaging films used in the FFS process should be
        minimized by appropriate controls during component fabrication, supply and
        handling. Due to the criticality of packaging films, procedures should be
        implemented to ensure that the films supplied meet defined specifications and
        are of the appropriate quality, including material thickness and strength, microbial
        and particulate contamination, integrity and artwork, as relevant. The sampling
        frequency, the bioburden and, where applicable, endotoxin/pyrogen levels of
        packaging films and associated components should be defined and controlled
        within the PQS and considered in the CCS.

8.98    Particular attention should be given to understanding and assessing the
        operation of the equipment, including set-up, filling, sealing and cutting
        processes, so that critical process parameters are understood, validated,
        controlled and monitored appropriately.

8.99    Any product contact gases, e.g. those used to inflate the container or used as a
        product overlay, should be appropriately filtered, as close to the point of use as
        possible. The quality of gases used and the effectiveness of gas filtration systems
        should be verified periodically in accordance with paragraphs 6.18 and 6.19.

8.100 The controls identified during qualification of FFS should be in alignment with the
      CCS. Aspects to be considered include but are not limited to:

        i.    determination of the boundaries of the critical zone,

       ii.    environmental control and monitoring, both of the machine and the
              background in which it is placed,

       iii.   personnel gowning requirements,




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                          -40-                             25 August 2023
                                      Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



      iv.    integrity testing of the product filling lines and filtration systems (as relevant),

       v.    duration of the batch or filling campaign,

      vi.    control of packaging films, including             any    requirements     for   film
             decontamination or sterilisation,

      vii.   cleaning-in-place and sterilisation-in-place of equipment as necessary,

     viii.   machine operation, settings and alarm management (as relevant).

8.101 Critical process parameters for FFS should be determined during equipment
      qualification and should include, but are not limited to:

        i.   settings for uniform package dimensions and cutting in accordance with
             validated parameters;

       ii.   setting, maintenance and monitoring of validated forming temperatures
             (including pre-heating and cooling), forming times and pressures as relevant;

      iii.   setting, maintenance and monitoring of validated sealing temperatures,
             sealing temperature uniformity across the seal, sealing times and pressures
             as relevant;

      iv.    environmental and product temperature;

       v.    batch-specific testing of package seal strength and uniformity;

      vi.    settings for correct filling volumes, speeds and uniformity;

      vii.   settings for any additional printing (batch coding), embossing or debossing
             to ensure that unit integrity is not compromised;

     viii.   methods and parameters for integrity testing of filled containers (see
             paragraph 8.22).

8.102 Appropriate procedures for the verification, monitoring and recording of FFS
      critical process parameters and equipment operation should be applied during
      production.

8.103 Operational procedures should describe how forming and sealing issues are
      detected and rectified. Rejected units or sealing issues should be recorded and
      investigated.

8.104 Appropriate maintenance procedures should be established based on risk, and
      include maintenance and inspection plans for tooling critical to the effectiveness
      of unit sealing. Any issues identified that indicate a potential product quality
      concern should be documented and investigated.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                          -41-                             25 August 2023
                                     Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



BLOW-FILL-SEAL

8.105 Blow-Fill-Seal equipment used for the manufacture of products which are
      terminally sterilised should be installed in at least a grade D environment. The
      conditions at the point of fill should comply with the environmental requirements
      of paragraphs 8.3 and 8.4.

8.106 BFS used for aseptic processing:

       i.    For shuttle type equipment used for aseptic filling, the parison is open to the
             environment and therefore the areas where parison extrusion, blow-
             moulding and sealing take place should meet grade A conditions at the
             critical zones. The filling environment should be designed and maintained to
             meet grade A conditions for viable and total particle limits both at rest and
             when in operation.

       ii.   For rotary-type equipment used for aseptic filling, the parison is generally
             closed to the environment once formed, the filling environment within the
             parison should be designed and maintained to meet grade A conditions for
             viable and total particle limits both at rest and when in operation.

      iii.   The equipment should be installed in at least a grade C environment,
             provided that grade A/B clothing is used. The microbiological monitoring of
             operators wearing grade A/B clothing in a grade C area, should be performed
             in accordance with risk management principles, and the limits and monitoring
             frequencies applied with consideration of the activities performed by these
             operators.

8.107 Due to the generation of particles from polymer extrusion and cutting during
      operation, and the restrictive size of critical filling zones of BFS equipment, in
      operation monitoring of total particle for BFS equipment is not expected.
      However, data should be available to demonstrate that the design of the
      equipment ensures that critical zones of the filling process environment would
      meet grade A conditions in operation.

8.108 Viable environmental monitoring of BFS processes should be risk-based, and
      designed in accordance with section 9 of this Annex. In operation viable
      monitoring should be undertaken for the full duration of critical processing,
      including equipment assembly. For rotary-type BFS equipment, it is
      acknowledged that monitoring of the critical filling zone may not be possible.

8.109 The environmental control and monitoring programme should take into
      consideration the moving parts and complex airflow paths generated by the BFS
      process and the effect of the high heat outputs of the process, (e.g. through the
      use of airflow visualization studies and/or other equivalent studies).
      Environmental monitoring programmes should also consider factors such as air-
      filter configuration, air-filter integrity, cooling systems integrity (see paragraph
      6.21), equipment design and qualification.

8.110 Air or other gases that make contact with critical surfaces of the container during
      extrusion, formation or sealing of the moulded container should undergo
      appropriate filtration. The quality of gas used and the effectiveness of gas



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -42-                            25 August 2023
                                      Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



        filtration systems should be verified periodically in accordance with paragraphs
        6.18 and 6.19.

8.111 Particulate and microbial contamination of the polymer granulate should be
      prevented by appropriate design, control, and maintenance of the polymer
      granulate storage, sampling and distribution systems.

8.112 The capability of the extrusion system to provide appropriate sterility assurance
      for the moulded container should be understood and validated. The sampling
      frequency, the bioburden and, where applicable, endotoxin/pyrogen levels of the
      raw polymer should be defined and controlled within the PQS and considered in
      the CCS.

8.113 Interventions requiring cessation of filling and/or extrusion, moulding and sealing
      and, where required, re-sterilisation of the filling machine should be clearly
      defined and described in the filling procedure, and included in the APS as relevant
      (see paragraphs 9.34, 9.35 and 9.36).

8.114 The controls identified during qualification of BFS should be in alignment with the
      site’s CCS. Aspects to be considered include but are not limited to:

        i.   determination of the boundaries of the critical zone,

       ii.   environmental control and monitoring, both of the machine and the
             background in which it is placed,

      iii.   personnel gowning requirements,

      iv.    integrity testing of the product filling lines and filtration systems (as relevant),

       v.    duration of the batch or filling campaign,

      vi.    control of polymer granulate, including distribution systems and critical
             extrusion temperatures,

      vii.   cleaning-in-place and sterilisation-in-place of equipment as necessary,

     viii.   machine operation, settings and alarm management (as relevant).

8.115 Critical process parameters for BFS should be determined during equipment
      qualification and should include, but are not limited to:

        i.   clean-in-place and sterilisation-in-place of product pipelines and filling
             needles (mandrels);

       ii.   setting, maintenance and monitoring of extrusion parameters, including
             temperature, speed and extruder throat settings for parison thickness;

      iii.   setting, maintenance and monitoring of mould temperatures, including rate
             of cooling where necessary for product stability;

      iv.    preparation and sterilisation of ancillary components added to the moulded
             unit, e.g. bottle caps;


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                          -43-                             25 August 2023
                                      Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products




       v.    environmental control, cleaning, sterilisation and monitoring of the critical
             extrusion, transfer and filling areas as relevant;

      vi.    batch-specific testing of package wall-thickness at critical points of the
             container;

     vii.    settings for correct filling volumes, speeds and uniformity;

     viii.   settings for any additional printing (batch coding), embossing or debossing
             to ensure that unit integrity and quality is not compromised;

      ix.    methods and parameters for integrity testing of 100% of all filled containers
             (see paragraph 8.22);

       x.    settings for cutters or punches used to remove waste plastic surrounding
             filled units (flash removal).

8.116 Appropriate procedures for the verification, monitoring and recording of BFS
      critical process parameters and equipment operation should be applied during
      production.

8.117 Operational procedures should describe how blowing, forming and sealing issues
      are detected and rectified. Rejected units or sealing issues should be recorded
      and investigated.

8.118 Where the BFS process includes the addition of components to moulded
      containers (e.g. addition of caps to LVP bottles), these components should be
      appropriately decontaminated and added to the process using a clean, controlled
      process.

        i.   For aseptic processes, the addition of components should be performed
             under grade A conditions, to ensure the sterility of critical surfaces, using pre-
             sterilised components.

       ii.   For terminally sterilised products, the validation of terminal sterilisation
             processes should ensure the sterility of all critical product pathways between
             the component and moulded container, including areas that are not wetted
             during sterilisation.

      iii.   Testing procedures should be established and validated to ensure the
             effective sealing of components and moulded containers.

8.119 Appropriate maintenance procedures should be established based on risk, and
      include maintenance and inspection plans for items critical to unit sealing,
      integrity and sterility.

8.120 The moulds used to form containers are considered critical equipment and any
      changes or modification to moulds should result in an assessment of finished
      product container integrity, and where the assessment indicates, should be
      supported by validation. Any issues identified that indicate a potential product
      quality concern should be documented and investigated.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -44-                             25 August 2023
                                        Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products




LYOPHILIZATION

8.121 Lyophilization is a critical process step and all activities that can affect the sterility
      of the product or material need to be regarded as extensions of the aseptic
      processing of the sterilised product. The lyophilization equipment and its
      processes should be designed to ensure that product or material sterility is
      maintained during lyophilization by preventing microbial and particle
      contamination between the filling of products for lyophilization, and completion of
      lyophilization process. All control measures in place should be determined by the
      site’s CCS.

8.122 The sterilisation of the lyophilizer and associated equipment (e.g. trays, vial
      support rings) should be validated and the holding time between the sterilisation
      cycle and use appropriately challenged during APS (see paragraph 9.33). The
      lyophilizer should be sterilised regularly, based on system design. Re-sterilisation
      should be performed following maintenance or cleaning. Sterilised lyophilizers
      and associated equipment should be protected from contamination after
      sterilisation.

8.123 Lyophilizers and associated product transfer and loading/unloading areas should
      be designed to minimize operator intervention as far as possible. The frequency
      of lyophilizer sterilisation should be determined based on the design and risks
      related to system contamination during use. Lyophilizers that are manually
      loaded or unloaded with no barrier technology separation should be sterilised
      before each load. For lyophilizers loaded and unloaded by automated systems or
      protected by closed barrier systems, the frequency of sterilisation should be
      justified and documented as part of the CCS.1

8.124 The integrity of the lyophilizer should be maintained following sterilisation and
      during lyophilization. The filter used to maintain lyophilizer integrity should be
      sterilised before each use of the system and its integrity testing results should be
      part of the batch certification/release. The frequency of vacuum/leak integrity
      testing of the chamber should be documented and the maximum permitted
      leakage of air into the lyophilizer should be specified and checked at the start of
      every cycle.

8.125 Lyophilization trays should be checked regularly to ensure that they are not
      misshapen or damaged.

8.126 Points to consider for the design of loading (and unloading, where the lyophilized
      material is still unsealed and exposed), include but are not limited to:

          i.   The loading pattern within the lyophilizer should be specified and
               documented.

         ii.   The transfer of partially closed containers to a lyophilizer should be
               undertaken under grade A conditions at all times and handled in a manner
               designed to minimize direct operator intervention. Technologies such as
               conveyor systems or portable transfer systems (e.g. clean air transfer carts,


1         This provision enters into force on 25 August 2024.


    PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -45-                            25 August 2023
                                     Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



              portable unidirectional airflow workstations) should be used to ensure that
              the cleanliness of the system used to transfer the partially closed containers
              is maintained. Alternatively, where supported by validation, trays closed in
              grade A and not reopened whilst in the grade B area may be used to protect
              partially stoppered vials (e.g. appropriately closed boxes).

       iii.   Airflow patterns should not be adversely affected by transport devices and
              venting of the loading zone.

      iv.     Unsealed containers (such as partially stoppered vials) should be maintained
              under grade A conditions and should normally be separated from operators
              by physical barrier technology or any other appropriate measures.

       v.     Where seating of the stoppers is not completed prior to opening the
              lyophilizer chamber, product removed from the lyophilizer should remain
              under grade A conditions during subsequent handling.

      vi.     Utensils used during loading and unloading of the lyophilizer (e.g. trays,
              bags, placing devices, tweezers) should be sterile.


CLOSED SYSTEMS

8.127 The use of closed systems can reduce the risk of microbial, particle and chemical
      contamination from the adjacent environment. Closed systems should always be
      designed to reduce the need for manual manipulations and the associated risks.

8.128 It is critical to ensure the sterility of all product contact surfaces of closed systems
      used for aseptic processing. The design and selection of any closed system used
      for aseptic processing should ensure maintenance of sterility. Connection of
      sterile equipment (e.g. tubing/pipework) to the sterilised product pathway after
      the final sterilising grade filter should be designed to be connected aseptically
      (e.g. by intrinsic sterile connection devices).

8.129 Appropriate measures should be in place to ensure the integrity of components
      used in aseptic connections. The means by which this is achieved should be
      determined and captured in the CCS. Appropriate system integrity tests should
      be considered when there is a risk of compromising product sterility. Supplier
      assessment should include the collation of data in relation to potential failure
      modes that may lead to a loss of system sterility.

8.130 The background environment in which closed systems are located should be
      based on their design and the processes undertaken. For aseptic processing and
      where there are any risks that system integrity may be compromised, the system
      should be located in grade A. If the system can be shown to remain integral at
      every usage (e.g. via pressure testing and/or monitoring) then a lower classified
      area may be used. Any transfer between classified areas should be thoroughly
      assessed (see paragraph 4.10). If the closed system is opened (e.g. for
      maintenance of a bulk manufacturing line) then this should be performed in a
      classified area appropriate to the materials (e.g. grade C for terminal sterilisation
      processes, or grade A for aseptic processing) or be subject to further cleaning
      and disinfection (and sterilisation in case of aseptic processes).



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -46-                            25 August 2023
                                     Annex 1         Manufacture of sterile medicinal products




SINGLE USE SYSTEMS (SUS)

8.131 SUS are those technologies used in manufacture of sterile products which are
      used as an alternative to reusable equipment. SUS can be individual components
      or made up of multiple components such as bags, filters, tubing, connectors,
      valves, storage bottles and sensors. Single use systems should be designed to
      reduce the need for manipulations and complexity of manual interventions.

8.132 There are some specific risks associated with SUS which should be assessed as
      part of the CCS. These risks include but are not limited to:

        i.   the interaction between the product and product contact surface (such as
             adsorption, or leachables and extractables),

       ii.   the fragile nature of the system compared with fixed reusable systems,

      iii.   the increase in the number and complexity of manual operations (including
             inspection and handling of the system) and connections made,

      iv.    the complexity of the assembly,

       v.    the performance of the pre- and post-use integrity testing for sterilising grade
             filters (see paragraph 8.87),

      vi.    the risk of holes and leakage,

      vii.   the potential for compromising the system at the point of opening the outer
             packaging,

     viii.   the risk of particle contamination.

8.133 Sterilisation processes for SUS should be validated and shown to have no
      adverse impact on system performance.

8.134 Assessment of suppliers of disposable systems including sterilisation is critical to
      the selection and use of these systems. For sterile SUS, verification of sterility
      assurance should be performed as part of the supplier qualification and evidence
      of sterilisation of each unit should be checked on receipt.

8.135 The adsorption and reactivity of the product with product contact surfaces should
      be evaluated under process conditions.

8.136 The extractable and leachable profiles of the SUS and any impact on the quality
      of the product especially where the system is made from polymer-based
      materials should be evaluated. An assessment should be carried out for each
      component to evaluate the applicability of the extractable profile data. For
      components considered to be at high risk from leachables, including those that
      may absorb processed materials or those with extended material contact times,
      an assessment of leachable profile studies, including safety concerns, should be
      taken into consideration. If applying simulated processing conditions, these
      should accurately reflect the actual processing conditions and be based on a
      scientific rationale.


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                          -47-                            25 August 2023
                                    Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products




8.137 SUS should be designed to maintain integrity throughout processing under the
      intended operational conditions. Attention to the structural integrity of the single
      use components is necessary where these may be exposed to more extreme
      conditions (e.g. freezing and thawing processes) either during routine processing
      or transportation. This should include verification that intrinsic sterile connection
      devices (both heat sealed and mechanically sealed) remain integral under these
      conditions.

8.138 Acceptance criteria should be established and implemented for SUS
      corresponding to the risks or criticality of the products and its processes. On
      receipt, each piece of SUS should be checked to ensure that they have been
      manufactured, supplied and delivered in accordance with the approved
      specification. A visual inspection of the outer packaging (e.g. appearance of
      exterior carton, product pouches), label printing, and review of attached
      documents (e.g. certificate of conformance and proof of sterilisation) should be
      carried out and documented prior to use.

8.139 Critical manual handling operations of SUS such as assembly and connections
      should be subject to appropriate controls and verified during APS.


9      Environmental & process monitoring
GENERAL

9.1    The site’s environmental and process monitoring programme forms part of the
       overall CCS and is used to monitor the controls designed to minimize the risk of
       microbial and particle contamination. It should be noted that the reliability of each
       of the elements of the monitoring system (viable, non-viable and APS) when
       taken in isolation is limited and should not be considered individually to be an
       indicator of asepsis. When considered together, the results help confirm the
       reliability of the design, validation and operation of the system that they are
       monitoring.

9.2    This programme is typically comprised of the following elements:

       i.    environmental monitoring – total particle;
       ii.   environmental and personnel monitoring – viable particle;
      iii.   temperature, relative humidity and other specific characteristics;
      iv.    APS (aseptically manufactured product only).

9.3    The information from these systems should be used for routine batch
       certification/release and for periodic assessment during process review or
       investigation. This applies for both terminal sterilisation and aseptic processes,
       however, the criticality of the impact may differ depending upon the product and
       process type.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -48-                            25 August 2023
                                   Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



ENVIRONMENTAL AND PROCESS MONITORING

9.4    An environmental monitoring programme should be established and
       documented. The purpose of the environmental monitoring programme, is to:
       i.   Provide assurance that cleanrooms and clean air equipment continue to
            provide an environment of appropriate air cleanliness, in accordance with
            design and regulatory requirements.
      ii.   Effectively detect excursions from environmental limits triggering
            investigation and assessment of risk to product quality.
       Risk assessments should be performed in order to establish this comprehensive
       environmental monitoring programme, i.e. sampling locations, frequency of
       monitoring, monitoring methods and incubation conditions (e.g. time,
       temperature(s), aerobic and/or anaerobic conditions).

       These risk assessments should be conducted based on detailed knowledge of;
       the process inputs and final product, the facility, equipment, the criticality of
       specific processes and steps, the operations involved, routine monitoring data,
       monitoring data obtained during qualification and knowledge of typical microbial
       flora isolated from the environment.

       The risk assessment should include the determination of critical monitoring
       locations, those locations where the presence of microorganisms during
       processing may have an impact upon product quality, (e.g. grade A, aseptic
       processing areas and the grade B areas that directly interface with the grade A
       area). Consideration of other information such as air visualisation studies should
       also be included. These risk assessments should be reviewed regularly in order
       to confirm the effectiveness of the site’s environmental monitoring programme.
       The monitoring programme should be considered in the overall context of the
       trend analysis and the CCS for the site.

9.5    Routine monitoring of cleanrooms, clean air equipment and personnel should be
       performed in operation throughout all critical stages of processing, including
       equipment set-up.

9.6    Other characteristics, such as temperature and relative humidity, should be
       controlled within ranges that align with product/processing/personnel
       requirements and support maintenance of defined cleanliness standards (e.g.
       grade A or B).

9.7    The monitoring of grade A should demonstrate the maintenance of aseptic
       processing conditions during critical operations. Monitoring should be performed
       at locations posing the highest risk of contamination to the sterile equipment
       surfaces, containers, closures and product. The selection of monitoring locations
       and the orientation and positioning of sampling devices should be justified and
       appropriate to obtain reliable data from the critical zones.

9.8    Sampling methods should not pose a risk of contamination to the manufacturing
       operations.

9.9    Appropriate alert levels and action limits should be set for the results of viable
       and total particle monitoring. The maximum total particle action limits are


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -49-                            25 August 2023
                                     Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



        described in Table 5 and the maximum viable particle action limits are described
        in Table 6. However, more stringent action limits may be applied based on data
        trending, the nature of the process or as determined within the CCS. Both viable
        and total particle alert levels should be established based on results of cleanroom
        qualification tests and periodically reviewed based on ongoing trend data.

9.10    Alert levels for grade A (total particle only) grade B, grade C and grade D should
        be set such that adverse trends (e.g. a numbers of events or individual events
        that indicate a deterioration of environmental control) are detected and
        addressed.

9.11    Monitoring procedures should define the approach to trending. Trends should
        include, but are not limited to:

        i.    increasing numbers of excursions from action limits or alert levels;
       ii.    consecutive excursions from alert levels;
       iii.   regular but isolated excursion from action limits that may have a common
              cause, (e.g. single excursions that always follow planned preventative
              maintenance);
       iv.    changes in microbial flora type and numbers and predominance of specific
              organisms. Particular attention should be given to organisms recovered that
              may indicate a loss of control, deterioration in cleanliness or organisms that
              may be difficult to control such as spore-forming microorganisms and
              moulds.

9.12    The monitoring of grade C and D cleanrooms in operation should be performed
        based on data collected during qualification and routine data to allow effective
        trend analysis. The requirements of alert levels and action limits will depend on
        the nature of the operations carried out. Action limits may be more stringent than
        those listed in Table 5 and Table 6.

9.13    If action limits are exceeded, operating procedures should prescribe a root cause
        investigation, an assessment of the potential impact to product (including batches
        produced between the monitoring and reporting) and requirements for corrective
        and preventive actions. If alert levels are exceeded, operating procedures should
        prescribe assessment and follow-up, which should include consideration of an
        investigation and/or corrective actions to avoid any further deterioration of the
        environment.


ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING – TOTAL PARTICLE

9.14    A total particle monitoring program should be established to obtain data for
        assessing potential contamination risks and to ensure the maintenance of the
        environment for sterile operations in a qualified state.

9.15    The limits for environmental monitoring of airborne particle concentration for each
        graded area are given in Table 5.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -50-                            25 August 2023
                                           Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



Table 5: Maximum permitted total particle concentration for monitoring.

                   Maximum limits for total particle          Maximum limits for total particle
    Grade                  ≥ 0.5 μm/m3                                  ≥ 5 μm/m3
                        at rest          in operation             at rest           in operation
         A              3 520                3 520                  29                    29
         B              3 520               352 000                 29                  2 930
         C             352 000             3 520 000              2 930                29 300
                      3 520 000               Not                 29 300                 Not
         D
                                       predetermined (a)                          predetermined (a)

       (a)   For grade D, in operation limits are not predetermined. The manufacturer should
             establish in operation limits based on a risk assessment and on routine data, where
             applicable.

       Note 1:     The particle limits given in the table for the “at rest” state should be achieved after
                   a short “clean up” period defined during qualification (guidance value of less than
                   20 minutes) in an unmanned state, after the completion of operations (see
                   paragraph 4.29).

       Note 2:     The occasional indication of macro particle counts, especially ≥ 5 µm, within
                   grade A may be considered to be false counts due to electronic noise, stray light,
                   coincidence loss etc. However, consecutive or regular counting of low levels may
                   be indicative of a possible contamination event and should be investigated. Such
                   events may indicate early failure of the room air supply filtration system,
                   equipment failure, or may also be diagnostic of poor practices during machine
                   set-up and routine operation.

9.16     For grade A, particle monitoring should be undertaken for the full duration of
         critical processing, including equipment assembly.

9.17     The grade A area should be monitored continuously (for particles ≥0.5 and
         ≥5 µm) and with a suitable sample flow rate (at least 28 litres (1ft 3) per minute)
         so that all interventions, transient events and any system deterioration is
         captured. The system should frequently correlate each individual sample result
         with alert levels and action limits at such a frequency that any potential excursion
         can be identified and responded to in a timely manner. Alarms should be triggered
         if alert levels are exceeded. Procedures should define the actions to be taken in
         response to alarms including the consideration of additional microbial monitoring.

9.18     It is recommended that a similar system be used for the grade B area although
         the sample frequency may be decreased. The grade B area should be monitored
         at such a frequency and with suitable sample size that the programme captures
         any increase in levels of contamination and system deterioration. If alert levels
         are exceeded, alarms should be triggered.

9.19     The selection of the monitoring system should take into account any risk
         presented by the materials used in the manufacturing operation (e.g. those
         involving live organisms, powdery products or radiopharmaceuticals) that may
         give rise to biological, chemical or radiation hazards.

9.20     In the case where contaminants are present due to the processes involved and
         would potentially damage the particle counter or present a hazard (e.g. live
         organisms, powdery products and radiation hazards), the frequency and strategy


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                               -51-                                25 August 2023
                                   Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       employed should be such as to assure the environmental classification both prior
       to and post exposure to the risk. An increase in viable particle monitoring should
       be considered to ensure comprehensive monitoring of the process. Additionally,
       monitoring should be performed during simulated operations. Such operations
       should be performed at appropriate intervals. The approach should be defined in
       the CCS.

9.21   The size of monitoring samples taken using automated systems will usually be a
       function of the sampling rate of the system used. It is not necessary for the
       sample volume to be the same as that used for formal classification of cleanrooms
       and clean air equipment. Monitoring sample volumes should be justified.


ENVIRONMENTAL AND PERSONNEL MONITORING – VIABLE PARTICLE

9.22   Where aseptic operations are performed, microbial monitoring should be frequent
       using a combination of methods such as settle plates, volumetric air sampling,
       glove, gown and surface sampling (e.g. swabs and contact plates). The method
       of sampling used should be justified within the CCS and should be demonstrated
       not to have a detrimental impact on grade A and B airflow patterns. Cleanroom
       and equipment surfaces should be monitored at the end of an operation.

9.23   Viable particle monitoring should also be performed within the cleanrooms when
       normal manufacturing operations are not occurring (e.g. post disinfection, prior to
       start of manufacturing, on completion of the batch and after a shutdown period),
       and in associated rooms that have not been used, in order to detect potential
       incidents of contamination which may affect the controls within the cleanrooms.
       In case of an incident, additional sample locations may be used as a verification
       of the effectiveness of a corrective action (e.g. cleaning and disinfection).

9.24   Continuous viable air monitoring in grade A (e.g. air sampling or settle plates)
       should be undertaken for the full duration of critical processing, including
       equipment (aseptic set-up) assembly and critical processing. A similar approach
       should be considered for grade B cleanrooms based on the risk of impact on the
       aseptic processing. The monitoring should be performed in such a way that all
       interventions, transient events and any system deterioration would be captured
       and any risk caused by interventions of the monitoring operations is avoided.

9.25   A risk assessment should evaluate the locations, type and frequency of personnel
       monitoring based on the activities performed and the proximity to critical zones.
       Monitoring should include sampling of personnel at periodic intervals during the
       process. Sampling of personnel should be performed in such a way that it will not
       compromise the process. Particular consideration should be given to monitoring
       personnel following involvement in critical interventions (at a minimum gloves,
       but may require monitoring of areas of gown as applicable to the process) and
       on each exit from the grade B cleanroom (gloves and gown). Where monitoring
       of gloves is performed after critical interventions, the outer gloves should be
       replaced prior to continuation of activity. Where monitoring of gowns is required
       after critical interventions, the gown should be replaced before further activity in
       the cleanroom.

9.26   Microbial monitoring of personnel in the grade A and grade B areas should be
       performed. Where operations are manual in nature (e.g. aseptic compounding or


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -52-                            25 August 2023
                                           Annex 1          Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



             filling), the increased risk should lead to enhanced emphasis placed on microbial
             monitoring of gowns and justified within the CCS.

9.27         Where monitoring is routinely performed by manufacturing personnel, this should
             be subject to regular oversight by the quality unit (refer also to paragraph 8.19).

9.28         The adoption of suitable alternative monitoring systems such as rapid methods
             should be considered by manufacturers in order to expedite the detection of
             microbiological contamination issues and to reduce the risk to product. These
             rapid and automated microbial monitoring methods may be adopted after
             validation has demonstrated their equivalency or superiority to the established
             methods.

9.29         Sampling methods and equipment used should be fully understood and
             procedures should be in place for the correct operation and interpretation of
             results obtained. Supporting data for the recovery efficiency of the sampling
             methods chosen should be available.

9.30         Action limits for viable particle contamination are shown in Table 6.

Table 6: Maximum action limits for viable particle contamination

                                        Settle plates           Contact plates         Glove print,
       Grade          Air sample        (diam. 90 mm)           (diam. 55mm),     Including 5 fingers on
                      CFU /m3           CFU /4 hours(a)         CFU / plate(b)         both hands
                                                                                       CFU / glove
              A                                              No growth(c)
              B              10                  5                     5                     5
              C             100                 50                    25                     -
              D             200                100                    50                     -

       (a)    -   Settle plates should be exposed in grade A and B areas for the duration of operations
                  (including equipment set-up) and changed as required after a maximum of 4 hours
                  (exposure time should be based on validation including recovery studies and it
                  should not have any negative effect on the suitability of the media used).
              -   For grade C and D areas, exposure time (with a maximum of 4 hours) and frequency
                  should be based on QRM.
              -   Individual settle plates may be exposed for less than 4 hours.
       (b)    Contact plate limits apply to equipment, room and gown surfaces within the grade A and
              grade B areas. Routine gown monitoring is not normally required for grade C and D
              areas, depending on their function.

       (c)    It should be noted that for grade A, any growth should result in an investigation.

       Note 1:       It should be noted that the types of monitoring methods listed in the table above
                     are examples and other methods can be used provided they meet the intent of
                     providing information across the whole of the critical process where product may
                     be contaminated (e.g. aseptic line set-up, aseptic processing, filling and
                     lyophilizer loading).

       Note 2:       Limits are applied using CFU throughout the document. If different or new
                     technologies are used that present results in a manner different from CFU, the
                     manufacturer should scientifically justify the limits applied and where possible
                     correlate them to CFU.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                                 -53-                            25 August 2023
                                     Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products




9.31    Microorganisms detected in the grade A and grade B areas should be identified
        to species level and the potential impact of such microorganisms on product
        quality (for each batch implicated) and overall state of control should be
        evaluated. Consideration should also be given to the identification of
        microorganisms detected in grade C and D areas (for example where action limits
        or alert levels are exceeded) or following the isolation of organisms that may
        indicate a loss of control, deterioration in cleanliness or that may be difficult to
        control such as spore-forming microorganisms and moulds and at a sufficient
        frequency to maintain a current understanding of the typical flora of these areas.


ASEPTIC PROCESS SIMULATION (APS) (ALSO KNOWN AS MEDIA FILL)

9.32    Periodic verification of the effectiveness of the controls in place for aseptic
        processing should include an APS using a sterile nutrient media and/or surrogate
        in place of the product. The APS should not be considered as the primary means
        to validate the aseptic process or aspects of the aseptic process. The
        effectiveness of the aseptic process should be determined through process
        design, adherence to the pharmaceutical quality system and process controls,
        training, and evaluation of monitoring data. Selection of an appropriate nutrient
        media and/or surrogate should be made based on the ability of the media and/or
        surrogate to imitate physical product characteristics assessed to pose a risk to
        product sterility during the aseptic process. Where processing stages may
        indirectly impact the viability of any introduced microbial contamination, (e.g.
        aseptically produced semi-solids, powders, solid materials, microspheres,
        liposomes and other formulations where product is cooled or heated or
        lyophilized), alternative procedures that represent the operations as closely as
        possible should be developed. Where surrogate materials, such as buffers, are
        used in parts of the APS, the surrogate material should not inhibit the growth of
        any potential contamination.

9.33    The APS should imitate as closely as possible the routine aseptic manufacturing
        process and include all the critical manufacturing steps, specifically:

        i.    The APS should assess all aseptic operations performed subsequent to the
              sterilisation and decontamination cycles of materials utilised in the process
              to the point where the container is sealed.

       ii.    For non-filterable formulations, any additional aseptic steps should be
              assessed.

       iii.   Where aseptic manufacturing is performed under an inert atmosphere, the
              inert gas should be substituted with air in the process simulation unless
              anaerobic simulation is intended.

       iv.    Processes requiring the addition of sterile powders should use an acceptable
              surrogate material in the same containers as those used in the process under
              evaluation.

       v.     Separate simulations of individual unit operations (e.g. processes involving
              drying, blending, milling and subdivision of a sterile powder) should be
              avoided. Any use of individual simulations should be supported by a
              documented justification and ensure that the sum total of the individual


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -54-                            25 August 2023
                                     Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



              simulations continues to fully cover the whole process.

       vi.    The process simulation procedure for lyophilized products should represent
              the entire aseptic processing chain including filling, transport, loading, a
              representative duration of the chamber dwell, unloading and sealing under
              specified, documented and justified conditions representing worst case
              operating parameters.

       vii.   The lyophilization process simulation should mimic all aspects of the
              process, except those that may affect the viability or recovery of
              contaminants. For instance, boiling-over or actual freezing of the solution
              should be avoided. Factors to consider in determining APS design include,
              where applicable:

                    the use of air to break vacuum instead of nitrogen or other process
                     gases,

                    replicating the maximum interval between sterilisation of the
                     lyophilizer and its use,

                    replicating the maximum period of time between filtration and
                     lyophilization, and

                    quantitative aspects of worst-case situations, e.g. loading the largest
                     number of trays, replicating the longest duration of loading where the
                     chamber is open to the environment.

9.34     The APS should take into account various aseptic manipulations and
         interventions known to occur during normal production as well as worst-case
         situations, and take into account the following:

         i.   Inherent and corrective interventions representative of the routine process
              should be performed in a manner and frequency similar to that during the
              routine aseptic process.

        ii.   The inclusion and frequency of interventions in the APS should be based on
              assessed risks posed to product sterility.

9.35     APS should not be used to justify practices that pose unnecessary contamination
         risks.

9.36     In developing the APS plan, consideration should be given to the following:

         i.   Identification of worst case conditions covering the relevant variables, such
              as container size and line speed, and their impact on the process. The
              outcome of the assessment should justify the variables selected.

        ii.   Determining the representative sizes of container/closure combinations to be
              used for validation. Bracketing or matrix approach may be considered for
              validation of the same container/closure configuration for different products
              where process equivalence is scientifically justified.

       iii.   Maximum permitted holding times for sterile product and equipment exposed


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -55-                            25 August 2023
                                      Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



               during the aseptic process.

        iv.    The volume filled per container, which should be sufficient to ensure that the
               media contacts all equipment and component surfaces that may directly
               contaminate the sterile product. The volume used should provide sufficient
               headspace to support potential microbial growth and ensure that turbidity can
               be detected during inspection.

         v.    The requirement for substitution of any inert gas used in the routine aseptic
               manufacturing process by air unless anaerobic simulation is intended. In
               these situations, inclusion of occasional anaerobic simulations as part of the
               overall validation strategy should be considered (see paragraph 9.33 point
               iii).

        vi.    The selected nutrient media should be capable of growing a designated
               group of reference microorganisms as described by the relevant
               pharmacopeia and suitably representative local isolates.

       vii.    The method of detection of microbial contamination should be scientifically
               justified to ensure that contamination is reliably detected.

       viii.   The process simulation should be of sufficient duration to challenge the
               process, the operators that perform interventions, shift changes and the
               capability of the processing environment to provide appropriate conditions
               for the manufacture of a sterile product.

        ix.    Where the manufacturer operates different or extended shifts, the APS
               should be designed to capture factors specific to those shifts that are
               assessed to pose a risk to product sterility, for example the maximum
               duration for which an operator may be present in the cleanroom.

         x.    Simulating normal aseptic manufacturing interruptions where the process is
               idle (e.g. shift changeovers, recharging dispensing vessels, introduction of
               additional equipment).

        xi.    Ensuring that environmental monitoring is conducted as required for routine
               production, and throughout the entire duration of the process simulation.

       xii.    Where campaign manufacturing occurs, such as in the use of Barrier
               Technologies or manufacture of sterile active substances, consideration
               should be given to designing and performing the process simulation so that
               it simulates the risks associated with both the beginning and the end of the
               campaign and demonstrating that the campaign duration does not pose any
               risk.

       xiii.   The performance of "end of production or campaign APS" may be used as
               additional assurance or investigative purposes; however, their use should be
               justified in the CCS and should not replace routine APS. If used, it should be
               demonstrated that any residual product does not negatively impact the
               recovery of any potential microbial contamination.

9.37     For sterile active substances, batch size should be large enough to represent
         routine operation, simulate intervention operation at the worst case, and cover all


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                          -56-                            25 August 2023
                                    Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       surfaces that may come into contact with the sterile product. In addition, all the
       simulated materials (surrogates or growth medium) should be subjected to
       microbial evaluation. The simulation materials should be sufficient to satisfy the
       evaluation of the process being simulated and should not compromise the
       recovery of micro-organisms.

9.38   APS should be performed as part of the initial validation, with at least three
       consecutive satisfactory simulation tests that cover all working shifts that the
       aseptic process may occur in, and after any significant modification to operational
       practices, facilities, services or equipment which are assessed to have an impact
       on the sterility assurance of the product (e.g. modification to the HVAC system,
       equipment, changes to process, number of shifts and numbers of personnel,
       major facility shut down). Normally, APS (periodic revalidation) should be
       repeated twice a year (approximately every six months) for each aseptic process,
       each filling line and each shift. Each operator should participate in at least one
       successful APS annually. Consideration should be given to performing an APS
       after the last batch prior to shut down, before long periods of inactivity or before
       decommissioning or relocation of a line.

9.39   Where manual operation (e.g. aseptic compounding or filling) occurs, each type
       of container, container closure and equipment train should be initially validated
       with each operator participating in at least 3 consecutive successful APS and
       revalidated with one APS approximately every 6 months for each operator. The
       APS batch size should mimic that used in the routine aseptic manufacturing
       process.

9.40   The number of units processed (filled) for APS should be sufficient to effectively
       simulate all activities that are representative of the aseptic manufacturing
       process. Justification for the number of units to be filled should be clearly
       captured in the CCS. Typically, a minimum of 5000 to 10000 units are filled. For
       small batches (e.g. those under 5000 units), the number of containers for APS
       should at least equal the size of the production batch.

9.41   Filled APS units should be agitated, swirled or inverted before incubation to
       ensure contact of the media with all interior surfaces in the container. All integral
       units from the APS should be incubated and evaluated, including units with
       cosmetic defects or those which have gone through non-destructive in-process
       control checks. If units are discarded during the process simulation and not
       incubated, these should be comparable with units discarded during a routine fill,
       and only if production SOPs clearly specify that units must be removed under the
       same circumstances (i.e. type of intervention; line location; specific number of
       units removed). In no case should more units be removed during a media fill
       intervention than would be cleared during a production run. Examples may
       include those that must be discarded during routine production after the set-up
       process or following a specific type of intervention. To fully understand the
       process and assess contamination risks during aseptic setup or mandatory line
       clearances, these units would typically be incubated separately, and would not
       necessarily be included in the acceptance criteria for the APS.

9.42   Where processes include materials that contact the product contact surfaces but
       are then discarded (e.g. product flushes), the discarded material should be
       simulated with nutrient media and be incubated as part of the APS, unless it can
       be clearly demonstrated that this waste process would not impact the sterility of
       the product.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -57-                            25 August 2023
                                       Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



9.43    Filled APS units should be incubated in a clear container to ensure visual
        detection of microbial growth. Where the product container is not clear (e.g.
        amber glass, opaque plastic), clear containers of identical configuration may be
        substituted to aid in the detection of contamination. When a clear container of
        identical configuration cannot be substituted, a suitable method for the detection
        of microbial growth should be developed and validated. Microorganisms isolated
        from contaminated units should be identified to the species level when practical,
        to assist in the determination of the likely source of the contaminant.

9.44    Filled APS units should be incubated without unnecessary delay to achieve the
        best possible recovery of potential contamination. The selection of the incubation
        conditions and duration should be scientifically justified and validated to provide
        an appropriate level of sensitivity of detection of microbial contamination.

9.45    On completion of incubation:

        i.    Filled APS units should be inspected by personnel who have been
              appropriately trained and qualified for the detection of microbiological
              contamination. Inspection should be conducted under conditions that
              facilitate the identification of any microbial contamination.


       ii.    Samples of the filled units should undergo positive control by inoculation
              with a suitable range of reference organisms and suitably representative
              local isolates.


9.46    The target should be zero growth. Any contaminated unit should result in a failed
        APS and the following actions should be taken:

        i.    an investigation to determine the most probable root cause(s);

       ii.    determination and implementation of appropriate corrective measures;

       iii.   a sufficient number of successful, consecutive repeat APS (normally a
              minimum of 3) should be conducted in order to demonstrate that the process
              has been returned to a state of control;

       iv.    a prompt review of all appropriate records relating to aseptic production since
              the last successful APS;

              a) The outcome of the review should include a risk assessment of potential
                 sterile breaches in batches manufactured since the last successful APS.
              b) All other batches not released to the market should be included in the
                 scope of the investigation. Any decision regarding their release status
                 should consider the investigation outcome.

       v.     all products that have been manufactured on a line subsequent to a process
              simulation failure should be quarantined until a successful resolution of the
              process simulation failure has occurred;

       vi.    where the root cause investigation indicates that the failure was related to
              operator activity, actions to limit the operator’s activities, until retrained and



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                          -58-                             25 August 2023
                                      Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



              requalified, should be taken;

       vii.   production should resume only after completion of successful revalidation.

9.47     All APS runs should be fully documented and include a reconciliation of units
         processed (e.g. units filled, incubated and not incubated). Justification for filled
         and non-incubated units should be included in the documentation. All
         interventions performed during the APS should be recorded, including the start
         and end time of each intervention and the involved person. All microbial
         monitoring data as well as other testing data should be recorded in the APS batch
         record.

9.48     An APS run should be aborted only under circumstances in which written
         procedures require commercial lots to be equally handled. An investigation
         should be documented in such cases.

9.49     An aseptic process should be subject to a repeat of the initial validation when:

         i.   the specific aseptic process has not been in operation for an extended period
              of time; or

        ii.   there is a change to the process, equipment, procedures or environment that
              has the potential to affect the aseptic process or an addition of new product
              containers or container-closure combinations.


10       Quality Control (QC)
10.1     There should be personnel available with appropriate training and experience in
         microbiology, sterility assurance and knowledge of the processes to support the
         design of the manufacturing activities, environmental monitoring regime and any
         investigation assessing the impact of microbiologically linked events to the safety
         of the sterile product.

10.2     Specifications for raw materials, components and products should include
         requirements for microbial, particulate and endotoxin/pyrogen limits when the
         need for this has been indicated by monitoring and/or by the CCS.

10.3     The bioburden assay should be performed on each batch for both aseptically
         filled product and terminally sterilised products and the results considered as part
         of the final batch review. There should be defined limits for bioburden immediately
         before the final sterilising grade filter or the terminal sterilisation process, which
         are related to the efficiency of the method to be used. Samples should be taken
         to be representative of the worst case scenario (e.g. at the end of hold time).
         Where overkill sterilisation parameters are set for terminally sterilised products,
         bioburden should be monitored at suitable scheduled intervals.

10.4     For products authorised for parametric release, a supporting pre-sterilisation
         bioburden monitoring programme for the filled product prior to initiating the
         sterilisation cycle should be developed and the bioburden assay should be
         performed for each batch. The sampling locations of filled units before
         sterilisation should be based on a worst case scenario and be representative of



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                          -59-                            25 August 2023
                                     Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



        the batch. Any organisms found during bioburden testing should be identified and
        their impact on the effectiveness of the sterilising process determined. Where
        appropriate, the level of endotoxin/pyrogen should be monitored.

10.5    The sterility test applied to the finished product should only be regarded as the
        last in a series of critical control measures by which sterility is assured. It cannot
        be used to assure sterility of a product that does not meet its design, procedural
        or validation parameters. The test should be validated for the product concerned.

10.6    The sterility test should be performed under aseptic conditions. Samples taken
        for sterility testing should be representative of the whole of the batch but should
        in particular include samples taken from parts of the batch considered to be most
        at risk of contamination, for example:

        i.    For products which have been filled aseptically, samples should include
              containers filled at the beginning and end of the batch. Additional samples,
              e.g. taken after critical interventions should be considered based on risk.

       ii.    For products which have been heat sterilised in their final containers,
              samples taken should be representative of the worst case locations (e.g. the
              potentially coolest or slowest to heat part of each load).

       iii.   For products which have been lyophilized, samples taken from different
              lyophilization loads.

        Note: Where the manufacturing process results in sub-batches (e.g. for
        terminally sterilised products) then sterility samples from each sub-batch should
        be taken and a sterility test for each sub-batch performed. Consideration should
        also be given to performing separate testing for other finished product tests.

10.7    For some products it may not be possible to obtain a sterility test result prior to
        release because the shelf life of the product is too short to allow completion of a
        sterility test. In these cases, the additional considerations of design of the process
        and additional monitoring and/or alternative test methods required to mitigate the
        identified risks should be assessed and documented.

10.8    Any process (e.g. Vaporized Hydrogen Peroxide, Ultra Violet) used to
        decontaminate the external surfaces of sterility samples prior to testing should
        not negatively impact the sensitivity of the test method or the reliability of the
        sample.

10.9    Media used for product testing should be quality control tested according to the
        related Pharmacopeia before use. Media used for environmental monitoring and
        APS should be tested for growth promotion before use, using a scientifically
        justified and designated group of reference microorganisms and including
        suitably representative local isolates. Media quality control testing should
        normally be performed by the end user. Any reliance on outsourced testing or
        supplier testing of media should be justified and transportation and shipping
        conditions should be thoroughly considered in this case.

10.10 Environmental monitoring data and trend data generated for classified areas
      should be reviewed as part of product batch certification/release. A written
      procedure should be available that describes the actions to be taken when data


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -60-                            25 August 2023
                                     Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



       from environmental monitoring are found out of trend or exceeding the
       established limits. For products with short shelf life, the environmental data for
       the time of manufacture may not be available; in these cases, the compliance
       should include a review of the most recent available data. Manufacturers of these
       products should consider the use of rapid/alternative methods.

10.11 Where rapid and automated microbial methods are used for general
      manufacturing purposes, these methods should be validated for the product(s) or
      processes concerned.


Glossary
Airlock – An enclosed space with interlocked doors, constructed to maintain air pressure
control between adjoining rooms (generally with different air cleanliness standards). The
intent of an airlock is to preclude ingress of particle matter and microorganism
contamination from a lesser controlled area.

Action limit – An established relevant measure (e.g. microbial, or airborne particle limits)
that, when exceeded, should trigger appropriate investigation and corrective action
based on the investigation.

Alert level – An established relevant measure (e.g. microbial, or airborne particle levels)
giving early warning of potential drift from normal operating conditions and validated
state, which does not necessarily give grounds for corrective action but triggers
appropriate scrutiny and follow-up to address the potential problem. Alert levels are
established based on routine and qualification trend data and are periodically reviewed.
The alert level can be based on a number of parameters including adverse trends,
individual excursions above a set limit and repeat events.

Aseptic preparation/processing – The handling of sterile product, containers and/or
devices in a controlled environment in which the air supply, materials and personnel are
regulated to prevent microbial, endotoxin/pyrogen and particle contamination.

Aseptic Process Simulation (APS) – A simulation of the entire aseptic manufacturing
process in order to verify the capability of the process to assure product sterility. Includes
all aseptic operations associated with routine manufacturing, e.g. equipment assembly,
formulation, filling, lyophilization and sealing processes as necessary.

Asepsis – A state of control attained by using an aseptic work area and performing
activities in a manner that precludes microbial contamination of the exposed sterile
product.

Bacterial retention testing – This test is performed to validate that a filter can remove
bacteria from a gas or liquid. The test is usually performed using a standard organism,
such as Brevundimonas diminuta at a minimum concentration of 107 Colony Forming
Units/cm2.

Barrier – A physical partition that affords aseptic processing area (usually grade A)
protection by separating it from the background environment. Such systems frequently
use in part or totally the Barrier Technologies known as RABS or isolators.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -61-                            25 August 2023
                                    Annex 1       Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



Bioburden – The total number of microorganisms associated with a specific item such as
personnel, manufacturing environments (air and surfaces), equipment, product
packaging, raw materials (including water), in-process materials, or finished products.

Bio-decontamination - A process that eliminates viable bioburden via use of sporicidal
chemical agents.

Biological Indicators (BI) – A population of microorganisms inoculated onto a suitable
medium (e.g. solution, container or closure) and placed within a steriliser or load or room
locations to determine the sterilisation or disinfection cycle efficacy of a physical or
chemical process. The challenge microorganism is selected and validated based upon
its resistance to the given process. Incoming lot D-value, microbiological count and purity
define the quality of the BI.

Blow-Fill-Seal (BFS) – A technology in which containers are formed from a thermoplastic
granulate, filled with product, and then sealed in a continuous, integrated, automatic
operation. The two most common types of BFS machines are the Shuttle type (with
Parison cut) and the Rotary type (Closed Parison).

Campaign manufacture – A manufacture of a series of batches of the same product in
sequence in a given period of time with strict adherence to established and validated
control measures.

Classified area – An area that contains a number of cleanrooms (see cleanroom
definition).

Cleaning – A process for removing contamination e.g. product residues or disinfectant
residues.

Clean area – An area with defined particle and microbiological cleanliness standards
usually containing a number of joined cleanrooms.

Cleanroom – A room designed, maintained, and controlled to prevent particle and
microbial contamination of drug products. Such a room is assigned and reproducibly
meets an appropriate air cleanliness level.

Cleanroom classification – A method of assessing the level of air cleanliness against a
specification for a cleanroom or clean air equipment by measuring the total particle
concentration.

Cleanroom qualification – A method of assessing the level of compliance of a classified
cleanroom or clean air equipment with its intended use.

Closed system – A system in which the product is not exposed to the surrounding
environment. For example, this can be achieved by the use of bulk product holders (such
as tanks or bags) that are connected to each other by pipes or tubes as a system, and
where used for sterile products, the full system is sterilised after the connections are
made. Examples of these can be (but are not limited to) large scale reusable systems,
such as those seen in active substance manufacturing, or disposable bag and manifold
systems, such as those seen in the manufacture of biological products. Closed systems
are not opened until the conclusion of an operation. The use of the term “closed systems”
in this Annex does not refer to systems such as RABS or isolator systems.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                       -62-                            25 August 2023
                                     Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



Colony Forming Unit (CFU) – A microbiological term that describes a single detectable
colony that originates from one or more microorganisms. Colony forming units are
typically expressed as CFU per ml for liquid samples, CFU per m3 for air sample and
CFU per sample for samples captured on solid medium such as settle or contact plates.

Contamination – The undesired introduction of impurities of a microbiological nature
(quantity and type of microorganisms, pyrogen), or of foreign particle matter, into or onto
a raw material, intermediate, active substance or drug product during production,
sampling, packaging or repackaging, storage or transport with the potential to adversely
impact product quality.

Contamination Control Strategy (CCS) – A planned set of controls for microorganisms,
endotoxin/pyrogen and particles, derived from current product and process
understanding that assures process performance and product quality. The controls can
include parameters and attributes related to active substance, excipient and drug product
materials and components, facility and equipment operating conditions, in-process
controls, finished product specifications, and the associated methods and frequency of
monitoring and control.

Corrective intervention – An intervention that is performed to correct or adjust an aseptic
process during its execution. These may not occur at a set frequency in the routine
aseptic process. Examples include such as clearing component jams, stopping leaks,
adjusting sensors, and replacing equipment components.

Critical surfaces – Surfaces that may come directly into contact with, or directly affect, a
sterile product or its containers or closures. Critical surfaces are rendered sterile prior to
the start of the manufacturing operation, and sterility is maintained throughout
processing.

Critical zone – A location within the aseptic processing area in which product and critical
surfaces are exposed to the environment.

Critical intervention – An intervention (corrective or inherent) into the critical zone.

D-value – The value of a parameter of sterilisation (duration or absorbed dose) required
to reduce the number of viable organisms to 10 per cent of the original number.

Dead leg – Length of non-circulating pipe (where fluid may remain static) that is greater
than 3 internal pipe diameters.

Decommission – When a process, equipment or cleanroom are closed and they will not
be used again.

Decontamination – The overall process of removal or reduction of any contaminants
(chemical, waste, residue or microorganisms) from an area, object, or person. The
method of decontamination used (e.g. cleaning, disinfection, sterilisation) should be
chosen and validated to achieve a level of cleanliness appropriate to the intended use of
the item decontaminated. See also Bio-decontamination.

Depyrogenation – A process designed to remove or inactivate pyrogenic material (e.g.
endotoxin) to a specified minimum quantity.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -63-                            25 August 2023
                                      Annex 1         Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



Disinfection – The process by which the reduction of the number of microorganisms is
achieved by the irreversible action of a product on their structure or metabolism, to a
level deemed to be appropriate for a defined purpose.

Endotoxin – A pyrogenic product (i.e. lipopolysaccharide) present in the Gram negative
bacterial cell wall. Endotoxin can lead to reactions in patients receiving injections ranging
from fever to death.

Equilibration time – Period which elapses between the attainment of the sterilisation
temperature at the reference measurement point and the attainment of the sterilisation
temperature at all points within the load.

Extractables - Chemical entities that migrate from the surface of the process equipment,
exposed to an appropriate solvent at extreme conditions, into the product or material
being processed.

First Air – Refers to filtered air that has not been interrupted prior to contacting exposed
product and product contact surfaces with the potential to add contamination to the air
prior to reaching the critical zone.

Filter Integrity test - A test to confirm that a filter (product, gas or HVAC filter) retain their
retentive properties and have not been damaged during handling, installation or
processing.

Form-Fill-Seal (FFS) –An automated filling process, typically used for terminally sterilised
products, which constructs the primary container out of a continuous flat roll of packaging
film while simultaneously filling the formed container with product and sealing the filled
containers in a continuous process. FFS processes may utilize a single web system
(where a single flat roll of film is wrapped around itself to form a cavity), or a dual web
system (where two flat rolls of film are brought together to form a cavity), often with the
aid of vacuum moulds or pressurised gases. The formed cavity is filled, sealed and cut
into sections. Films typically consist of a polymeric material, polymeric coated foil or other
suitable material.

Gowning qualification – A programme that establishes, both initially and on a periodic
basis, the capability of an individual to don the complete gown.

Grade A air supply – Air which is passed through a filter qualified as capable of producing
grade A total particle quality air, but where there is no requirement to perform continuous
total particle monitoring or meet grade A viable monitoring limits. Specifically used for
the protection of fully stoppered vials where the cap has not yet been crimped.

HEPA filter – High efficiency particulate air filter specified in accordance with a relevant
international standard.

Inherent interventions – An intervention that is an integral part of the aseptic process and
is required for either set-up, routine operation and/or monitoring (e.g. aseptic assembly,
container replenishment, environmental sampling). Inherent interventions are required
by procedure or work instruction for the execution of the aseptic process.

Intrinsic sterile connection device – A device that reduces the risk of contamination during
the connection process; these can be mechanical or fusion sealing.



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                           -64-                             25 August 2023
                                     Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



Isokinetic sampling head – A sampling head designed to disturb the air as little as
possible so that the same particles go into the nozzle as would have passed the area if
the nozzle had not been there (i.e. the sampling condition in which the mean velocity of
the air entering the sample probe inlet is nearly the same (± 20 percent) as the mean
velocity of the airflow at that location).

Isolator – An enclosure capable of being subject to reproducible interior bio-
decontamination, with an internal work zone meeting grade A conditions that provides
uncompromised, continuous isolation of its interior from the external environment (e.g.
surrounding cleanroom air and personnel). There are two major types of isolators:

        i.   Closed isolator systems exclude external contamination of the isolator’s
             interior by accomplishing material transfer via aseptic connection to auxiliary
             equipment, rather than use of openings to the surrounding environment.
             Closed systems remain sealed throughout operations.
       ii.   Open isolator systems are designed to allow for the continuous or semi-
             continuous ingress and/or egress of materials during operations through one
             or more openings. Openings are engineered (e.g. using continuous
             overpressure) to exclude the entry of external contaminant into the isolator.

Leachables – Chemical entities that migrate into products from the product contact
surface of the process equipment or containers under normal condition of use and/or
storage.

Local isolates – Suitably representative microorganisms of the site that are frequently
recovered through environmental monitoring within the classified zone/areas especially
grade A and B areas, personnel monitoring or positive sterility test results.

Lyophilization – A physical-chemical drying process designed to remove solvents, by
way of sublimation, from both aqueous and non-aqueous systems, primarily to achieve
product or material stability. Lyophilization is synonymous to the term freeze-drying.

Manual aseptic processing– An aseptic process where the operator manually
compounds, fills, places and /or seals an open container with sterile product.

Operator - Any individual participating in the processing operation, including line set-up,
filling, maintenance, or other personnel associated with manufacturing activities.

Overkill sterilisation – A process that is sufficient to provide at least a 12 log 10 reduction
of microorganisms having a minimum D-value of 1 minute.

Parison – The "tube" of polymer extruded by the BFS machine from which containers
are formed.

Pass-through hatch – Synonymous with airlock (see airlock definition) but typically
smaller in size.

Patient – Human or animal including participants in a clinical trial.

Post-aseptic processing terminal heat treatment– A terminal moist heat process
employed after aseptic processing which has been demonstrated to provide a sterility
assurance level (SAL) ≤10-6 but where the requirements of steam sterilisation (for



 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                         -65-                             25 August 2023
                                    Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products



example, F0≥8 min) are not fulfilled. This may also be beneficial in the destruction of
viruses that may not be removed through filtration.

Pyrogen – A substance that induces a febrile reaction in patients receiving injections;

Rapid Transfer System/Port (RTP) – A System used for the transfer of items into RABS
or isolators that minimizes the risk to the critical zone. An example would be a rapid
transfer container with an alpha/beta port.

Raw material – Any ingredient intended for use in the manufacture of a sterile product,
including those that may not appear in the final drug product.

Restricted Access Barrier System (RABS) – System that provides an enclosed, but not
fully sealed, environment meeting defined air quality conditions (for aseptic processing
grade A), and using a rigid-wall enclosure and integrated gloves to separate its interior
from the surrounding cleanroom environment. The inner surfaces of the RABS are
disinfected and decontaminated with a sporicidal agent. Operators use gloves, half suits,
RTPs and other integrated transfer ports to perform manipulations or convey materials
to the interior of the RABS. Depending on the design, doors are rarely opened, and only
under strictly pre-defined conditions.

Single Use Systems (SUS) – Systems in which product contact components are used
only once to replace reusable equipment such as stainless steel transfer lines or bulk
containers. SUS covered in this document are those that are used in manufacturing
processes of sterile products and are typically made up of disposable components such
as bags, filters, tubing, connectors, storage bottles and sensors.

Sporicidal agent – An agent that destroys bacterial and fungal spores when used in
sufficient concentration for specified contact time. It is expected to kill all vegetative
microorganisms.

Sterile Product – For purpose of this guidance, sterile product refers to one or more of
the sterilised elements exposed to aseptic conditions and ultimately making up the sterile
active substance or finished sterile product. These elements include the containers,
closures, and components of the finished drug product. Or, a product that is rendered
sterile by a terminal sterilisation process.

Sterilising grade filter – A filter that, when appropriately validated, will remove a defined
microbial challenge from a fluid or gas producing a sterile effluent. Usually such filters
have a pore size equal or less than 0.22 µm.

Terminal Sterilisation – The application of a lethal sterilising agent or conditions to a
product in its final container to achieve a predetermined sterility assurance level (SAL)
of 10⁻⁶ or better (e.g. the theoretical probability of there being a single viable
microorganism present on or in a sterilised unit is equal to or less than 1 x 10-6 (one in a
million)).

Turbulent airflow – Air that is not unidirectional. Turbulent air in cleanrooms should flush
the cleanroom via mixed flow dilution and ensure maintenance of acceptable air quality.

Unidirectional airflow – An airflow moving in a single direction, in a robust and uniform
manner, and at sufficient speed, to reproducibly sweep particles away from the critical
processing or testing area.


 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -66-                            25 August 2023
                                    Annex 1        Manufacture of sterile medicinal products




Unidirectional Airflow (UDAF) unit – A cabinet supplied with filtered unidirectional airflow
(previously referred to as a Laminar Airflow Unit or LAF).

Worst case – A set of conditions encompassing processing limits and circumstances,
including those within standard operating procedures, that pose the greatest chance of
process or product failure (when compared with ideal conditions). Such conditions have
the highest potential to, but do not necessarily always result in product or process failure.

Water system – A system for producing, storing and distributing water, usually compliant
to a specific pharmacopeia grade (e.g. purified water and water for injection (WFI)).

Z-value – The temperature difference that leads to a 10-fold change in the D-value of the
biological indicators.




 PE 009-17 (Annexes)                        -67-                            25 August 2023
      Annex 2A Manufacture of advanced therapy medicinal products for human use
