Laboratory biosafety manual
          Third edition




       World Health Organization
               Geneva
                2004
WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
World Health Organization.
  Laboratory biosafety manual. – 3rd ed.
   1.Containment of biohazards - methods 2.Laboratories - standards 3.Laboratory
   infection - prevention and control 4.Manuals I.Title.
   ISBN 92 4 154650 6        (LC/NLM classification: QY 25)         WHO/CDS/CSR/LYO/2004.11




This publication was supported by Grant/Cooperative Agreement Number U50/CCU012445-08
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, GA, USA. Its contents are
solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the
CDC.




© World Health Organization 2004
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization can be obtained from Marketing and
Dissemination, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel: +41 22
791 2476; fax: +41 22 791 4857; email: bookorders@who.int). Requests for permission to reproduce or
translate WHO publications – whether for sale or for noncommercial distribution – should be addressed
to Publications, at the above address (fax: +41 22 791 4806; email: permissions@who.int).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal
status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its
frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not
yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are
endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature
that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished
by initial capital letters.
The World Health Organization does not warrant that the information contained in this publication is
complete and correct and shall not be liable for any damages incurred as a result of its use.
Designed by minimum graphics
Printed in Malta
Contents



Foreword                                                         vii
Acknowledgements                                                viii

1. General principles                                             1
   Introduction                                                   1

PART I. Biosafety guidelines                                      5
2. Microbiological risk assessment                               7
   Specimens for which there is limited information              8
   Risk assessment and genetically modified microorganisms       8
3. Basic laboratories – Biosafety Levels 1 and 2                 9
   Code of practice                                              9
   Laboratory design and facilities                             12
   Laboratory equipment                                         14
   Health and medical surveillance                              16
   Training                                                     16
   Waste handling                                               17
   Chemical, fire, electrical, radiation and equipment safety   19
4. The containment laboratory – Biosafety Level 3               20
   Code of practice                                             20
   Laboratory design and facilities                             21
   Laboratory equipment                                         22
   Health and medical surveillance                              22
5. The maximum containment laboratory – Biosafety Level 4       25
   Code of practice                                             25
   Laboratory design and facilities                             25
6. Laboratory animal facilities                                 28
   Animal facility – Biosafety Level 1                          29
   Animal facility – Biosafety Level 2                          29
   Animal facility – Biosafety Level 3                          30
   Animal facility – Biosafety Level 4                          31
   Invertebrates                                                32
7. Guidelines for laboratory/facility commissioning             33
8. Guidelines for laboratory/facility certification             36

                                          • iii •
                                LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



PART II. Laboratory biosecurity                                                  45
9. Laboratory biosecurity concepts                                               47

PART III. Laboratory equipment                                                   49
10. Biological safety cabinets                                                   51
    Class I biological safety cabinet                                            51
    Class II biological safety cabinets                                          53
    Class III biological safety cabinet                                          56
    Biological safety cabinet air connections                                    56
    Selection of a biological safety cabinet                                     57
    Using biological safety cabinets in the laboratory                           57
11. Safety equipment                                                             61
    Negative-pressure flexible-film isolators                                    61
    Pipetting aids                                                               63
    Homogenizers, shakers, blenders and sonicators                               63
    Disposable transfer loops                                                    64
    Microincinerators                                                            64
    Personal protective equipment and clothing                                   64

PART IV. Good microbiological techniques                                         67
12. Laboratory techniques                                                        69
    Safe handling of specimens in the laboratory                                 69
    Use of pipettes and pipetting aids                                           70
    Avoiding the dispersal of infectious materials                               70
    Use of biological safety cabinets                                            70
    Avoiding ingestion of infectious materials and contact with skin and eyes    71
    Avoiding injection of infectious materials                                   71
    Separation of serum                                                          72
    Use of centrifuges                                                           72
    Use of homogenizers, shakers, blenders and sonicators                        73
    Use of tissue grinders                                                       73
    Care and use of refrigerators and freezers                                   73
    Opening of ampoules containing lyophilized infectious materials              74
    Storage of ampoules containing infectious materials                          74
    Standard precautions with blood and other body fluids, tissues and excreta   74
    Precautions with materials that may contain prions                           76
13. Contingency plans and emergency procedures                                   78
    Contingency plan                                                             78
    Emergency procedures for microbiological laboratories                        79
14. Disinfection and sterilization                                               82
    Definitions                                                                  82
    Cleaning laboratory materials                                                83

                                              • iv •
                                          CONTENTS



    Chemical germicides                                           83
    Local environmental decontamination                           88
    Decontamination of biological safety cabinets                 89
    Hand-washing/hand decontamination                             90
    Heat disinfection and sterilization                           90
    Incineration                                                  92
    Disposal                                                      93
15. Introduction to the transport of infectious substances        94
    International transport regulations                           94
    The basic triple packaging system                             95
    Spill clean-up procedure                                      95

PART V. Introduction to biotechnology                             99
16. Biosafety and recombinant DNA technology                     101
    Biosafety considerations for biological expression systems   102
    Biosafety considerations for expression vectors              102
    Viral vectors for gene transfer                              102
    Transgenic and “knock-out” animals                           102
    Transgenic plants                                            103
    Risk assessments for genetically modified organisms          103
    Further considerations                                       104

PART VI. Chemical, fire and electrical safety                    105
17. Hazardous chemicals                                          107
    Routes of exposure                                           107
    Storage of chemicals                                         107
    General rules regarding chemical incompatibilities           107
    Toxic effects of chemicals                                   107
    Explosive chemicals                                          108
    Chemical spills                                              108
    Compressed and liquefied gases                               109
18. Additional laboratory hazards                                110
    Fire hazards                                                 110
    Electrical hazards                                           111
    Noise                                                        111
    Ionizing radiation                                           111

PART VII. Safety organization and training                       115
19. The biosafety officer and biosafety committee                117
    Biosafety officer                                            117
    Biosafety committee                                          118



                                             •v•
                              LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



20. Safety for support staff                                119
    Engineering and building maintenance services           119
    Cleaning (domestic) services                            119
21. Training programmes                                     120

PART VIII. Safety checklist                                 123
22. Safety checklist                                        125
    Laboratory premises                                     125
    Storage facilities                                      125
    Sanitation and staff facilities                         126
    Heating and ventilation                                 126
    Lighting                                                126
    Services                                                126
    Laboratory biosecurity                                  127
    Fire prevention and fire protection                     127
    Flammable liquid storage                                128
    Compressed and liquefied gases                          128
    Electrical hazards                                      128
    Personal protection                                     129
    Health and safety of staff                              129
    Laboratory equipment                                    130
    Infectious materials                                    130
    Chemicals and radioactive substances                    130

PART IX. References, annexes and index                      133
References                                                  135
Annex 1 First aid                                           138
Annex 2 Immunization of staff                               139
Annex 3 WHO Biosafety Collaborating Centres                 140
Annex 4 Equipment safety                                    141
         Equipment that may create a hazard                 141
Annex 5 Chemicals: hazards and precautions                  145

Index                                                       170




                                           • vi •
Foreword



The World Health Organization (WHO) has long recognized that safety and, in
particular, biological safety are important international issues. WHO published the
first edition of the Laboratory biosafety manual in 1983. The manual encouraged
countries to accept and implement basic concepts in biological safety and to develop
national codes of practice for the safe handling of pathogenic microorganisms in
laboratories within their geographical borders. Since 1983, many countries have used
the expert guidance provided in the manual to develop such codes of practice. A second
edition of the manual was published in 1993.
   WHO continues to provide international leadership in biosafety through this third
edition of the manual by addressing biological safety and security issues facing us in
the current millennium. The third edition stresses throughout the importance of
personal responsibility. New chapters have been added on risk assessment, safe use of
recombinant DNA technology and transport of infectious materials. Recent world
events have revealed new threats to public health through deliberate misuse and release
of microbiological agents and toxins. The third edition therefore also introduces
biosecurity concepts – the protection of microbiological assets from theft, loss or
diversion, which could lead to the inappropriate use of these agents to cause public
health harm. This edition also includes safety information from the 1997 WHO
publication Safety in health-care laboratories (1).
   The third edition of the WHO Laboratory biosafety manual is a helpful reference
and guide to nations that accept the challenge to develop and establish national codes
of practice for securing microbiological assets, yet ensuring their availability for clinical,
research and epidemiological purposes.




Dr A. Asamoa-Baah
Assistant Director-General
Communicable Diseases
World Health Organization
Geneva, Switzerland


                                            • vii •
Acknowledgements



The development of this third edition of the Laboratory biosafety manual has been
made possible through the contributions of the following, whose expertise is gratefully
acknowledged:
Dr W. Emmett Barkley, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, USA
Dr Murray L. Cohen, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA
  (retired)
Dr Ingegerd Kallings, Swedish Institute of Infectious Disease Control, Stockholm,
  Sweden
Ms Mary Ellen Kennedy, Consultant in Biosafety, Ashton, Ontario, Canada
Ms Margery Kennett, Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory, North Mel-
  bourne, Australia (retired)
Dr Richard Knudsen, Office of Health and Safety, Centers for Disease Control and
  Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA
Dr Nicoletta Previsani, Biosafety programme, World Health Organization, Geneva,
  Switzerland
Dr Jonathan Richmond, Office of Health and Safety, Centers for Disease Control and
  Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA (retired)
Dr Syed A. Sattar, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Dr Deborah E. Wilson, Division of Occupational Health and Safety, Office of Research
  Services, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Serv-
  ices, Washington, DC, USA
Dr Riccardo Wittek, Institute of Animal Biology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
  Switzerland
The assistance of the following is also gratefully acknowledged:
Ms Maureen Best, Office of Laboratory Security, Health Canada, Ottawa, Canada
Dr Mike Catton, Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory, North Melbourne,
  Australia
Dr Shanna Nesby, Office of Health and Safety, Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
  vention, Atlanta, GA, USA
Dr Stefan Wagener, Canadian Science Centre for Human and Animal Health, Winni-
  peg, Canada
The writers and reviewers also wish to acknowledge the original contributions of the
many professionals whose work was embodied in the first and second editions of the
Laboratory biosafety manual and in the 1997 WHO publication Safety in health-care
laboratories (1).

                                        • viii •
1. General principles



Introduction
Throughout this manual, references are made to the relative hazards of infective
microorganisms by risk group (WHO Risk Groups 1, 2, 3 and 4). This risk group
classification is to be used for laboratory work only. Table 1 describes the risk groups.


Table 1. Classification of infective microorganisms by risk group
Risk Group 1 (no or low individual and community risk)
A microorganism that is unlikely to cause human or animal disease.

Risk Group 2 (moderate individual risk, low community risk)
A pathogen that can cause human or animal disease but is unlikely to be a serious hazard to
laboratory workers, the community, livestock or the environment. Laboratory exposures may
cause serious infection, but effective treatment and preventive measures are available and the
risk of spread of infection is limited.

Risk Group 3 (high individual risk, low community risk)
A pathogen that usually causes serious human or animal disease but does not ordinarily spread
from one infected individual to another. Effective treatment and preventive measures are available.

Risk Group 4 (high individual and community risk)
A pathogen that usually causes serious human or animal disease and that can be readily
transmitted from one individual to another, directly or indirectly. Effective treatment and preventive
measures are not usually available.


Laboratory facilities are designated as basic – Biosafety Level 1, basic – Biosafety Level 2,
containment – Biosafety Level 3, and maximum containment – Biosafety Level 4.
Biosafety level designations are based on a composite of the design features,
construction, containment facilities, equipment, practices and operational procedures
required for working with agents from the various risk groups. Table 2 relates but
does not “equate” risk groups to the biosafety level of laboratories designed to work
with organisms in each risk group.
   Countries (regions) should draw up a national (regional) classification of
microorganisms, by risk group, taking into account:



                                                •1•
                                   LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Table 2. Relation of risk groups to biosafety levels, practices and equipment
RISK  BIOSAFETY           LABORATORY                LABORATORY                SAFETY
GROUP LEVEL               TYPE                      PRACTICES                 EQUIPMENT

 1      Basic –           Basic teaching,           GMT                       None; open bench
        Biosafety         research                                            work
        Level 1

 2      Basic –           Primary health            GMT plus protective       Open bench plus BSC
        Biosafety         services; diagnostic      clothing, biohazard       for potential aerosols
        Level 2           services, research        sign

 3      Containment – Special diagnostic            As Level 2 plus           BSC and/or other
        Biosafety     services, research            special clothing,         primary devices for all
        Level 3                                     controlled access,        activities
                                                    directional airflow

 4      Maximum       Dangerous pathogen            As Level 3 plus           Class III BSC, or
        containment – units                         airlock entry, shower     positive pressure suits
        Biosafety                                   exit, special waste       in conjunction with
        Level 4                                     disposal                  Class II BSCs, double-
                                                                              ended autoclave
                                                                              (through the wall),
                                                                              filtered air
BSC, biological safety cabinet; GMT, good microbiological techniques (see Part IV of this manual)



 1. Pathogenicity of the organism.
 2. Mode of transmission and host range of the organism. These may be influenced
    by existing levels of immunity in the local population, density and movement of
    the host population, presence of appropriate vectors, and standards of environ-
    mental hygiene.
 3. Local availability of effective preventive measures. These may include: prophylaxis
    by immunization or administration of antisera (passive immunization); sanitary
    measures, e.g. food and water hygiene; control of animal reservoirs or arthropod
    vectors.
 4. Local availability of effective treatment. This includes passive immunization,
    postexposure vaccination and use of antimicrobials, antivirals and chemo-
    therapeutic agents, and should take into consideration the possibility of the
    emergence of drug-resistant strains.
The assignment of an agent to a biosafety level for laboratory work must be based on
a risk assessment. Such an assessment will take the risk group as well as other factors
into consideration in establishing the appropriate biosafety level. For example, an agent
that is assigned to Risk Group 2 may generally require Biosafety Level 2 facilities,
equipment, practices and procedures for safe conduct of work. However, if particular
experiments require the generation of high-concentration aerosols, then Biosafety


                                                  •2•
                                      1. GENERAL PRINCIPLES



Level 3 may be more appropriate to provide the necessary degree of safety, since it
ensures superior containment of aerosols in the laboratory workplace. The biosafety
level assigned for the specific work to be done is therefore driven by professional
judgement based on a risk assessment, rather than by automatic assignment of a
laboratory biosafety level according to the particular risk group designation of the
pathogenic agent to be used (see Chapter 2).
   Table 3 summarizes the facility requirements at the four biosafety levels.


Table 3. Summary of biosafety level requirements
                                                  BIOSAFETY LEVEL

                                                  1             2           3           4
         a
Isolation of laboratory                           No            No          Yes         Yes
Room sealable for decontamination                 No            No          Yes         Yes
Ventilation:
    — inward airflow                              No            Desirable   Yes         Yes
    — controlled ventilating system               No            Desirable   Yes         Yes
    — HEPA-filtered air exhaust                   No            No          Yes/Nob     Yes
Double-door entry                                 No            No          Yes         Yes
Airlock                                           No            No          No          Yes
Airlock with shower                               No            No          No          Yes
Anteroom                                          No            No          Yes         —
Anteroom with shower                              No            No          Yes/Noc     No
Effluent treatment                                No            No          Yes/Noc     Yes
Autoclave:
    — on site                                     No            Desirable   Yes         Yes
    — in laboratory room                          No            No          Desirable   Yes
    — double-ended                                No            No          Desirable   Yes
Biological safety cabinets                        No            Desirable   Yes         Yes
Personnel safety monitoring capabilityd           No            No          Desirable   Yes
a
  Environmental and functional isolation from general traffic.
b
  Dependent on location of exhaust (see Chapter 4).
c
  Dependent on agent(s) used in the laboratory.
d
  For example, window, closed-circuit television, two-way communication.


Thus, the assignment of a biosafety level takes into consideration the organism
(pathogenic agent) used, the facilities available, and the equipment practices and
procedures required to conduct work safely in the laboratory.




                                                 •3•
               PART I
Biosafety guidelines
2. Microbiological
   risk assessment


The backbone of the practice of biosafety is risk assessment. While there are many
tools available to assist in the assessment of risk for a given procedure or experiment,
the most important component is professional judgement. Risk assessments should
be performed by the individuals most familiar with the specific characteristics of the
organisms being considered for use, the equipment and procedures to be employed,
animal models that may be used, and the containment equipment and facilities
available. The laboratory director or principal investigator is responsible for ensuring
that adequate and timely risk assessments are performed, and for working closely with
the institution’s safety committee and biosafety personnel to ensure that appropriate
equipment and facilities are available to support the work being considered. Once
performed, risk assessments should be reviewed routinely and revised when necessary,
taking into consideration the acquisition of new data having a bearing on the degree
of risk and other relevant new information from the scientific literature.
   One of the most helpful tools available for performing a microbiological risk assess-
ment is the listing of risk groups for microbiological agents (see Chapter 1). However,
simple reference to the risk grouping for a particular agent is insufficient in the conduct
of a risk assessment. Other factors that should be considered, as appropriate, include:
 1. Pathogenicity of the agent and infectious dose
 2. Potential outcome of exposure
 3. Natural route of infection
 4. Other routes of infection, resulting from laboratory manipulations (parenteral,
    airborne, ingestion)
 5. Stability of the agent in the environment
 6. Concentration of the agent and volume of concentrated material to be manipulated
 7. Presence of a suitable host (human or animal)
 8. Information available from animal studies and reports of laboratory-acquired
    infections or clinical reports
 9. Laboratory activity planned (sonication, aerosolization, centrifugation, etc.)
10. Any genetic manipulation of the organism that may extend the host range of the
    agent or alter the agent’s sensitivity to known, effective treatment regimens (see
    Chapter 16)
11. Local availability of effective prophylaxis or therapeutic interventions.


                                           •7•
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



On the basis of the information ascertained during the risk assessment, a biosafety
level can be assigned to the planned work, appropriate personal protective equipment
selected, and standard operating procedures (SOPs) incorporating other safety
interventions developed to ensure the safest possible conduct of the work.

Specimens for which there is limited information
The risk assessment procedure described above works well when there is adequate
information available. However, there are situations when the information is
insufficient to perform an appropriate risk assessment, for example, with clinical
specimens or epidemiological samples collected in the field. In these cases, it is prudent
to take a cautious approach to specimen manipulation.
1. Standard precautions (2) should always be followed, and barrier protections applied
   (gloves, gowns, eye protection), whenever samples are obtained from patients.
2. Basic containment – Biosafety Level 2 practices and procedures should be the
   minimum requirement for handling specimens.
3. Transport of specimens should follow national and/or international rules and
   regulations.
Some information may be available to assist in determining the risk of handling these
specimens:
1. Medical data on the patient
2. Epidemiological data (morbidity and mortality data, suspected route of trans-
   mission, other outbreak investigation data)
3. Information on the geographical origin of the specimen.
In the case of outbreaks of disease of unknown etiology, appropriate ad hoc guidelines
may be generated and posted by national competent authorities and/or WHO on the
World Wide Web (as was the case during the 2003 emergence of the severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS)) to indicate how specimens should be consigned for
shipment and the biosafety level at which they should be analysed.

Risk assessment and genetically modified microorganisms
A detailed discussion of risk assessment and genetically modified organisms (GMOs)
is provided in Chapter 16.




                                           •8•
3. Basic laboratories –
   Biosafety Levels 1 and 2


For the purposes of this manual, the guidance and recommendations given as minimum
requirements pertaining to laboratories of all biosafety levels are directed at
microorganisms in Risk Groups 1–4. Although some of the precautions may appear
to be unnecessary for some organisms in Risk Group 1, they are desirable for training
purposes to promote good (i.e. safe) microbiological techniques (GMT).
   Diagnostic and health-care laboratories (public health, clinical or hospital-based)
must all be designed for Biosafety Level 2 or above. As no laboratory has complete
control over the specimens it receives, laboratory workers may be exposed to organisms
in higher risk groups than anticipated. This possibility must be recognized in the
development of safety plans and policies. In some countries, accreditation of clinical
laboratories is required. Globally, standard precautions (2) should always be adopted
and practised.
   The guidelines for basic laboratories – Biosafety Levels 1 and 2 presented here are
comprehensive and detailed, as they are fundamental to laboratories of all biosafety
levels. The guidelines for containment laboratories – Biosafety Level 3 and maximum
containment laboratories – Biosafety Level 4 that follow (Chapters 4 and 5) are
modifications of and additions to these guidelines, designed for work with the more
dangerous (hazardous) pathogens.

Code of practice
This code is a listing of the most essential laboratory practices and procedures that are
basic to GMT. In many laboratories and national laboratory programmes, this code
may be used to develop written practices and procedures for safe laboratory operations.
  Each laboratory should adopt a safety or operations manual that identifies known
and potential hazards, and specifies practices and procedures to eliminate or minimize
such hazards. GMT are fundamental to laboratory safety. Specialized laboratory
equipment is a supplement to but can never replace appropriate procedures. The most
important concepts are listed below.

Access
 1. The international biohazard warning symbol and sign (Figure 1) must be displayed
    on the doors of the rooms where microorganisms of Risk Group 2 or higher risk
    groups are handled.


                                          •9•
                              LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Figure 1. Biohazard warning sign for laboratory doors




                      BIOHAZARD
                                                                           WHO 04.64
                      ADMITTANCE TO AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY

                     Biosafety Level: _________________________________
                     Responsible Investigator: _________________________

                     In case of emergency call: ________________________
                     Daytime phone: __________Home phone: ___________

                        Authorization for entrance must be obtained from
                          the Responsible Investigator named above.




 2. Only authorized persons should be allowed to enter the laboratory working areas.
 3. Laboratory doors should be kept closed.
 4. Children should not be authorized or allowed to enter laboratory working areas.
 5. Access to animal houses should be specially authorized.
 6. No animals should be admitted other than those involved in the work of the
    laboratory.

Personal protection
 1. Laboratory coveralls, gowns or uniforms must be worn at all times for work in the
    laboratory.
 2. Appropriate gloves must be worn for all procedures that may involve direct or
    accidental contact with blood, body fluids and other potentially infectious materials
    or infected animals. After use, gloves should be removed aseptically and hands
    must then be washed.
 3. Personnel must wash their hands after handling infectious materials and animals,
    and before they leave the laboratory working areas.


                                            • 10 •
                    3. BASIC LABORATORIES – BIOSAFETY LEVELS 1 AND 2



 4. Safety glasses, face shields (visors) or other protective devices must be worn when
    it is necessary to protect the eyes and face from splashes, impacting objects and
    sources of artificial ultraviolet radiation.
 5. It is prohibited to wear protective laboratory clothing outside the laboratory, e.g.
    in canteens, coffee rooms, offices, libraries, staff rooms and toilets.
 6. Open-toed footwear must not be worn in laboratories.
 7. Eating, drinking, smoking, applying cosmetics and handling contact lenses is
    prohibited in the laboratory working areas.
 8. Storing human foods or drinks anywhere in the laboratory working areas is
    prohibited.
 9. Protective laboratory clothing that has been used in the laboratory must not be
    stored in the same lockers or cupboards as street clothing.

Procedures
 1. Pipetting by mouth must be strictly forbidden.
 2. Materials must not be placed in the mouth. Labels must not be licked.
 3. All technical procedures should be performed in a way that minimizes the formation
    of aerosols and droplets.
 4. The use of hypodermic needles and syringes should be limited. They must not be
    used as substitutes for pipetting devices or for any purpose other than parenteral
    injection or aspiration of fluids from laboratory animals.
 5. All spills, accidents and overt or potential exposures to infectious materials must
    be reported to the laboratory supervisor. A written record of such accidents and
    incidents should be maintained.
 6. A written procedure for the clean-up of all spills must be developed and followed.
 7. Contaminated liquids must be decontaminated (chemically or physically) before
    discharge to the sanitary sewer. An effluent treatment system may be required,
    depending on the risk assessment for the agent(s) being handled.
 8. Written documents that are expected to be removed from the laboratory need to
    be protected from contamination while in the laboratory.

Laboratory working areas
 1. The laboratory should be kept neat, clean and free of materials that are not pertinent
    to the work.
 2. Work surfaces must be decontaminated after any spill of potentially dangerous
    material and at the end of the working day.
 3. All contaminated materials, specimens and cultures must be decontaminated before
    disposal or cleaning for reuse.
 4. Packing and transportation must follow applicable national and/or international
    regulations.
 5. When windows can be opened, they should be fitted with arthropod-proof screens.



                                          • 11 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Biosafety management
 1. It is the responsibility of the laboratory director (the person who has immediate
    responsibility for the laboratory) to ensure the development and adoption of a
    biosafety management plan and a safety or operations manual.
 2. The laboratory supervisor (reporting to the laboratory director) should ensure
    that regular training in laboratory safety is provided.
 3. Personnel should be advised of special hazards, and required to read the safety or
    operations manual and follow standard practices and procedures. The laboratory
    supervisor should make sure that all personnel understand these. A copy of the
    safety or operations manual should be available in the laboratory.
 4. There should be an arthropod and rodent control programme.
 5. Appropriate medical evaluation, surveillance and treatment should be provided
    for all personnel in case of need, and adequate medical records should be
    maintained.

Laboratory design and facilities
In designing a laboratory and assigning certain types of work to it, special attention
should be paid to conditions that are known to pose safety problems. These include:
1. Formation of aerosols
2. Work with large volumes and/or high concentrations of microorganisms
3. Overcrowding and too much equipment
4. Infestation with rodents and arthropods
5. Unauthorized entrance
6. Workflow: use of specific samples and reagents.
Examples of laboratory designs for Biosafety Levels 1 and 2 are shown in Figures 2
and 3, respectively.

Design features
 1. Ample space must be provided for the safe conduct of laboratory work and for
    cleaning and maintenance.
 2. Walls, ceilings and floors should be smooth, easy to clean, impermeable to liquids
    and resistant to the chemicals and disinfectants normally used in the laboratory.
    Floors should be slip-resistant.
 3. Bench tops should be impervious to water and resistant to disinfectants, acids,
    alkalis, organic solvents and moderate heat.
 4. Illumination should be adequate for all activities. Undesirable reflections and glare
    should be avoided.
 5. Laboratory furniture should be sturdy. Open spaces between and under benches,
    cabinets and equipment should be accessible for cleaning.
 6. Storage space must be adequate to hold supplies for immediate use and thus prevent
    clutter on bench tops and in aisles. Additional long-term storage space, conveniently
    located outside the laboratory working areas, should also be provided.

                                          • 12 •
                     3. BASIC LABORATORIES – BIOSAFETY LEVELS 1 AND 2




Figure 2. A typical Biosafety Level 1 laboratory
          (graphics kindly provided by CUH2A, Princeton, NJ, USA)



 7. Space and facilities should be provided for the safe handling and storage of solvents,
    radioactive materials, and compressed and liquefied gases.
 8. Facilities for storing outer garments and personal items should be provided outside
    the laboratory working areas.
 9. Facilities for eating and drinking and for rest should be provided outside the
    laboratory working areas.
10. Hand-washing basins, with running water if possible, should be provided in each
    laboratory room, preferably near the exit door.
11. Doors should have vision panels, appropriate fire ratings, and preferably be self-
    closing.
12. At Biosafety Level 2, an autoclave or other means of decontamination should be
    available in appropriate proximity to the laboratory.
13. Safety systems should cover fire, electrical emergencies, emergency shower and
    eyewash facilities.
14. First-aid areas or rooms suitably equipped and readily accessible should be available
    (see Annex 1).

                                           • 13 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



15. In the planning of new facilities, consideration should be given to the provision of
    mechanical ventilation systems that provide an inward flow of air without
    recirculation. If there is no mechanical ventilation, windows should be able to be
    opened and should be fitted with arthropod-proof screens.
16. A dependable supply of good quality water is essential. There should be no cross-
    connections between sources of laboratory and drinking-water supplies. An anti-
    backflow device should be fitted to protect the public water system.
17. There should be a reliable and adequate electricity supply and emergency lighting
    to permit safe exit. A stand-by generator is desirable for the support of essential
    equipment, such as incubators, biological safety cabinets, freezers, etc., and for the
    ventilation of animal cages.
18. There should be a reliable and adequate supply of gas. Good maintenance of the
    installation is mandatory.
19. Laboratories and animal houses are occasionally the targets of vandals. Physical
    and fire security must be considered. Strong doors, screened windows and restricted
    issue of keys are compulsory. Other measures should be considered and applied,
    as appropriate, to augment security (see Chapter 9).

Laboratory equipment
Together with good procedures and practices, the use of safety equipment will help to
reduce risks when dealing with biosafety hazards. This section deals with basic
principles related to equipment suitable for laboratories of all biosafety levels.
Requirements for laboratory equipment pertinent to higher biosafety levels are dealt
with in the relevant chapters.
   The laboratory director should, after consultation with the biosafety officer and
safety committee (if designated), ensure that adequate equipment is provided and
that it is used properly. Equipment should be selected to take account of certain general
principles, i.e. it should be:
1. Designed to prevent or limit contact between the operator and the infectious
   material
2. Constructed of materials that are impermeable to liquids, resistant to corrosion
   and meet structural requirements
3. Fabricated to be free of burrs, sharp edges and unguarded moving parts
4. Designed, constructed and installed to facilitate simple operation and provide for
   ease of maintenance, cleaning, decontamination and certification testing; glassware
   and other breakable materials should be avoided, whenever possible.
Detailed performance and construction specifications may need to be consulted to
ensure that the equipment possesses the necessary safety features (see also Chapters
10 and 11).




                                          • 14 •
                      3. BASIC LABORATORIES – BIOSAFETY LEVELS 1 AND 2




Figure 3. A typical Biosafety Level 2 laboratory
          (graphics kindly provided by CUH2A, Princeton, NJ, USA). Procedures likely to generate
          aerosols are performed within a biological safety cabinet. Doors are kept closed and
          are posted with appropriate hazard signs. Potentially contaminated wastes are separated
          from the general waste stream.


Essential biosafety equipment
 1. Pipetting aids – to avoid mouth pipetting. Many different designs are available.
 2. Biological safety cabinets, to be used whenever:
    — infectious materials are handled; such materials may be centrifuged in the open
       laboratory if sealed centrifuge safety cups are used and if they are loaded and
       unloaded in a biological safety cabinet
    — there is an increased risk of airborne infection
    — procedures with a high potential for producing aerosols are used; these may
       include centrifugation, grinding, blending, vigorous shaking or mixing, sonic
       disruption, opening of containers of infectious materials whose internal pressure
       may be different from the ambient pressure, intranasal inoculation of animals,
       and harvesting of infectious tissues from animals and eggs.
 3. Plastic disposable transfer loops. Alternatively, electric transfer loop incinerators
    may be used inside the biological safety cabinet to reduce aerosol production.


                                             • 15 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



4. Screw-capped tubes and bottles.
5. Autoclaves or other appropriate means to decontaminate infectious materials.
6. Plastic disposable Pasteur pipettes, whenever available, to avoid glass.
7. Equipment such as autoclaves and biological safety cabinets must be validated with
   appropriate methods before being taken into use. Recertification should take place
   at regular intervals, according to the manufacturer’s instructions (see Chapter 7).

Health and medical surveillance
The employing authority, through the laboratory director, is responsible for ensuring
that there is adequate surveillance of the health of laboratory personnel. The objective
of such surveillance is to monitor for occupationally acquired diseases. Appropriate
activities to achieve these objectives are:
1. Provision of active or passive immunization where indicated (see Annex 2)
2. Facilitation of the early detection of laboratory-acquired infections
3. Exclusion of highly susceptible individuals (e.g. pregnant women or immuno-
   compromised individuals) from highly hazardous laboratory work
4. Provision of effective personal protective equipment and procedures.

Guidelines for the surveillance of laboratory workers handling microorganisms
at Biosafety Level 1
Historical evidence indicates that the microorganisms handled at this level are unlikely
to cause human disease or animal disease of veterinary importance. Ideally, however,
all laboratory workers should undergo a pre-employment health check at which their
medical history is recorded. Prompt reporting of illnesses or laboratory accidents is
desirable and all staff members should be made aware of the importance of maintaining
GMT.

Guidelines for the surveillance of laboratory workers handling microorganisms
at Biosafety Level 2
 1. A pre-employment or preplacement health check is necessary. The person’s medical
    history should be recorded and a targeted occupational health assessment
    performed.
 2. Records of illness and absence should be kept by the laboratory management.
 3. Women of childbearing age should be made aware of the risk to an unborn child
    of occupational exposure to certain microorganisms, e.g. rubella virus. The precise
    steps taken to protect the fetus will vary, depending on the microorganisms to
    which the women may be exposed.

Training
Human error and poor technique can compromise the best of safeguards to protect
the laboratory worker. Thus, a safety-conscious staff, well informed about the
recognition and control of laboratory hazards, is key to the prevention of laboratory-

                                         • 16 •
                    3. BASIC LABORATORIES – BIOSAFETY LEVELS 1 AND 2



acquired infections, incidents and accidents. For this reason, continuous in-service
training in safety measures is essential. An effective safety programme begins with the
laboratory managers, who should ensure that safe laboratory practices and procedures
are integrated into the basic training of employees. Training in safety measures should
be an integral part of new employees’ introduction to the laboratory. Employees should
be introduced to the code of practice and to local guidelines, including the safety or
operations manual. Measures to assure that employees have read and understood the
guidelines, such as signature pages, should be adopted. Laboratory supervisors play
the key role in training their immediate staff in good laboratory techniques. The
biosafety officer can assist in training and with the development of training aids and
documentation (see also Chapter 21).
   Staff training should always include information on safe methods for highly
hazardous procedures that are commonly encountered by all laboratory personnel
and which involve:
 1. Inhalation risks (i.e. aerosol production) when using loops, streaking agar plates,
    pipetting, making smears, opening cultures, taking blood/serum samples,
    centrifuging, etc.
 2. Ingestion risks when handling specimens, smears and cultures
 3. Risks of percutaneous exposures when using syringes and needles
 4. Bites and scratches when handling animals
 5. Handling of blood and other potentially hazardous pathological materials
 6. Decontamination and disposal of infectious material.

Waste handling
Waste is anything that is to be discarded.
   In laboratories, decontamination of wastes and their ultimate disposal are closely
interrelated. In terms of daily use, few if any contaminated materials will require actual
removal from the laboratory or destruction. Most glassware, instruments and
laboratory clothing will be reused or recycled. The overriding principle is that all
infectious materials should be decontaminated, autoclaved or incinerated within the
laboratory.
   The principal questions to be asked before discharge of any objects or materials
from laboratories that deal with potentially infectious microorganisms or animal tissues
are:
 1. Have the objects or materials been effectively decontaminated or disinfected by an
    approved procedure?
 2. If not, have they been packaged in an approved manner for immediate on-site
    incineration or transfer to another facility with incineration capacity?
 3. Does the disposal of the decontaminated objects or materials involve any additional
    potential hazards, biological or otherwise, to those who carry out the immediate
    disposal procedures or who might come into contact with discarded items outside
    the facility?

                                          • 17 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Decontamination
Steam autoclaving is the preferred method for all decontamination processes. Materials
for decontamination and disposal should be placed in containers, e.g. autoclavable
plastic bags, that are colour-coded according to whether the contents are to be
autoclaved and/or incinerated. Alternative methods may be envisaged only if they
remove and/or kill microorganisms (for more details see Chapter 14).

Handling and disposal procedures for contaminated materials and wastes
An identification and separation system for infectious materials and their containers
should be adopted. National and international regulations must be followed. Categories
should include:
 1. Non-contaminated (non-infectious) waste that can be reused or recycled or
    disposed of as general, “household” waste
 2. Contaminated (infectious) “sharps” – hypodermic needles, scalpels, knives and
    broken glass; these should always be collected in puncture-proof containers fitted
    with covers and treated as infectious
 3. Contaminated material for decontamination by autoclaving and thereafter washing
    and reuse or recycling
 4. Contaminated material for autoclaving and disposal
 5. Contaminated material for direct incineration.

Sharps
After use, hypodermic needles should not be recapped, clipped or removed from
disposable syringes. The complete assembly should be placed in a sharps disposal
container. Disposable syringes, used alone or with needles, should be placed in sharps
disposal containers and incinerated, with prior autoclaving if required.
    Sharps disposal containers must be puncture-proof/-resistant and must not be filled
to capacity. When they are three-quarters full they should be placed in “infectious
waste” containers and incinerated, with prior autoclaving if laboratory practice requires
it. Sharps disposal containers must not be discarded in landfills.

Contaminated (potentially infectious) materials for autoclaving and reuse
No precleaning should be attempted of any contaminated (potentially infectious)
materials to be autoclaved and reused. Any necessary cleaning or repair must be done
only after autoclaving or disinfection.

Contaminated (potentially infectious) materials for disposal
Apart from sharps, which are dealt with above, all contaminated (potentially infectious)
materials should be autoclaved in leakproof containers, e.g. autoclavable, colour-coded
plastic bags, before disposal. After autoclaving, the material may be placed in transfer
containers for transport to the incinerator. If possible, materials deriving from health-
care activities should not be discarded in landfills even after decontamination. If an


                                          • 18 •
                     3. BASIC LABORATORIES – BIOSAFETY LEVELS 1 AND 2



incinerator is available on the laboratory site, autoclaving may be omitted: the
contaminated waste should be placed in designated containers (e.g. colour-coded bags)
and transported directly to the incinerator. Reusable transfer containers should be
leakproof and have tight-fitting covers. They should be disinfected and cleaned before
they are returned to the laboratory for further use.
   Discard containers, pans or jars, preferably unbreakable (e.g. plastic), should be
placed at every work station. When disinfectants are used, waste materials should
remain in intimate contact with the disinfectant (i.e. not protected by air bubbles) for
the appropriate time, according to the disinfectant used (see Chapter 14). The discard
containers should be decontaminated and washed before reuse.
   Incineration of contaminated waste must meet with the approval of the public health
and air pollution authorities, as well as that of the laboratory biosafety officer (see
section on Incineration in Chapter 14).

Chemical, fire, electrical, radiation and equipment safety
A breakdown in the containment of pathogenic organisms may be the indirect result
of chemical, fire, electrical or radiation accidents. It is therefore essential to maintain
high standards of safety in these fields in any microbiological laboratory. Statutory
rules and regulations for each of these will normally be laid down by the competent
national or local authority, whose assistance should be sought if necessary. Chemical,
fire, electrical and radiation hazards are considered in greater detail in Part VI of this
manual (Chapters 17 and 18).
Additional information regarding safety equipment is presented in Chapter 11.




                                           • 19 •
4. The containment laboratory –
   Biosafety Level 3


The containment laboratory – Biosafety Level 3 is designed and provided for work
with Risk Group 3 microorganisms and with large volumes or high concentrations of
Risk Group 2 microorganisms that pose an increased risk of aerosol spread. Biosafety
Level 3 containment requires the strengthening of the operational and safety pro-
grammes over and above those for basic laboratories – Biosafety Levels 1 and 2 (set
out in Chapter 3).
   The guidelines given in this chapter are presented in the form of additions to those
for basic laboratories – Biosafety Levels 1 and 2, which must therefore be applied before
those specific for the containment laboratory – Biosafety Level 3. The major additions
and changes are in:
1. Code of practice
2. Laboratory design and facilities
3. Health and medical surveillance.
Laboratories in this category should be registered or listed with the national or other
appropriate health authorities.

Code of practice
The code of practice for basic laboratories – Biosafety Levels 1 and 2 applies except
where modified as follows.
1. The international biohazard warning symbol and sign (see Figure 1) displayed on
   laboratory access doors must identify the biosafety level and the name of the
   laboratory supervisor who controls access, and indicate any special conditions for
   entry into the area, e.g. immunization.
2. Laboratory protective clothing must be of the type with solid-front or wrap-around
   gowns, scrub suits, coveralls, head covering and, where appropriate, shoe covers or
   dedicated shoes. Front-buttoned standard laboratory coats are unsuitable, as are
   sleeves that do not fully cover the forearms. Laboratory protective clothing must
   not be worn outside the laboratory, and it must be decontaminated before it is
   laundered. The removal of street clothing and change into dedicated laboratory
   clothing may be warranted when working with certain agents (e.g. agricultural or
   zoonotic agents).


                                          • 20 •
                  4. THE CONTAINMENT LABORATORY – BIOSAFETY LEVEL 3



3. Open manipulations of all potentially infectious material must be conducted within
   a biological safety cabinet or other primary containment device (see also Chapter 10).
4. Respiratory protective equipment may be necessary for some laboratory procedures
   or working with animals infected with certain pathogens (see Chapter 11).

Laboratory design and facilities
The laboratory design and facilities for basic laboratories – Biosafety Levels 1 and 2
apply except where modified as follows:
1. The laboratory must be separated from the areas that are open to unrestricted
   traffic flow within the building. Additional separation may be achieved by placing
   the laboratory at the blind end of a corridor, or constructing a partition and door
   or access through an anteroom (e.g. a double-door entry or basic laboratory –
   Biosafety Level 2), describing a specific area designed to maintain the pressure
   differential between the laboratory and its adjacent space. The anteroom should
   have facilities for separating clean and dirty clothing and a shower may also be
   necessary.
2. Anteroom doors may be self-closing and interlocking so that only one door is
   open at a time. A break-through panel may be provided for emergency exit use.
3. Surfaces of walls, floors and ceilings should be water-resistant and easy to clean.
   Openings through these surfaces (e.g. for service pipes) should be sealed to facilitate
   decontamination of the room(s).
4. The laboratory room must be sealable for decontamination. Air-ducting systems
   must be constructed to permit gaseous decontamination.
5. Windows must be closed, sealed and break-resistant.
6. A hand-washing station with hands-free controls should be provided near each
   exit door.
7. There must be a controlled ventilation system that maintains a directional airflow
   into the laboratory room. A visual monitoring device with or without alarm(s)
   should be installed so that staff can at all times ensure that proper directional
   airflow into the laboratory room is maintained.
8. The building ventilation system must be so constructed that air from the contain-
   ment laboratory – Biosafety Level 3 is not recirculated to other areas within the
   building. Air may be high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtered, reconditioned
   and recirculated within that laboratory. When exhaust air from the laboratory (other
   than from biological safety cabinets) is discharged to the outside of the building, it
   must be dispersed away from occupied buildings and air intakes. Depending on
   the agents in use, this air may be discharged through HEPA filters. A heating,
   ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC) control system may be installed to prevent
   sustained positive pressurization of the laboratory. Consideration should be given
   to the installation of audible or clearly visible alarms to notify personnel of HVAC
   system failure.


                                          • 21 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



 9. All HEPA filters must be installed in a manner that permits gaseous
    decontamination and testing.
10. Biological safety cabinets should be sited away from walking areas and out of cross-
    currents from doors and ventilation systems (see Chapter 10).
11. The exhaust air from Class I or Class II biological safety cabinets (see Chapter 10),
    which will have been passed through HEPA filters, must be discharged in such a
    way as to avoid interference with the air balance of the cabinet or the building
    exhaust system.
12. An autoclave for the decontamination of contaminated waste material should be
    available in the containment laboratory. If infectious waste has to be removed from
    the containment laboratory for decontamination and disposal, it must be
    transported in sealed, unbreakable and leakproof containers according to national
    or international regulations, as appropriate.
13. Backflow-precaution devices must be fitted to the water supply. Vacuum lines should
    be protected with liquid disinfectant traps and HEPA filters, or their equivalent.
    Alternative vacuum pumps should also be properly protected with traps and filters.
14. The containment laboratory – Biosafety Level 3 facility design and operational
    procedures should be documented.
An example of laboratory design for Biosafety Level 3 is shown in Figure 4.

Laboratory equipment
The principles for the selection of laboratory equipment, including biological safety
cabinets (see Chapter 10) are the same as for the basic laboratory – Biosafety Level 2.
However, at Biosafety Level 3, manipulation of all potentially infectious material must
be conducted within a biological safety cabinet or other primary containment device.
Consideration should be given to equipment such as centrifuges, which will need
additional containment accessories, for example, safety buckets or containment rotors.
Some centrifuges and other equipment, such as cell-sorting instruments for use with
infected cells, may need additional local exhaust ventilation with HEPA filtration for
efficient containment.

Health and medical surveillance
The objectives of health and medical surveillance programmes for basic laboratories –
Biosafety Levels 1 and 2 also apply to containment laboratories – Biosafety Level 3,
except where modified as follows:
1. Medical examination of all laboratory personnel who work in containment
   laboratories – Biosafety Level 3 is mandatory. This should include recording of a
   detailed medical history and an occupationally-targeted physical examination.
2. After a satisfactory clinical assessment, the examinee may be provided with a medical
   contact card (e.g. as shown in Figure 5) stating that he or she is employed in a
   facility with a containment laboratory – Biosafety Level 3. This card should include


                                          • 22 •
                     4. THE CONTAINMENT LABORATORY – BIOSAFETY LEVEL 3




Figure 4. A typical Biosafety Level 3 laboratory
          (graphics kindly provided by CUH2A, Princeton, NJ, USA). The laboratory is separated
          from general traffic flow and accessed through an anteroom (double door entry or
          basic laboratory – Biosafety Level 2) or an airlock. An autoclave is available within the
          facility for decontamination of wastes prior to disposal. A sink with hands-free operation
          is available. Inward directional airflow is established and all work with infectious
          materials is conducted within a biological safety cabinet.


    a picture of the card holder, be wallet-sized, and always be carried by the holder.
    The name(s) of the contact persons to be entered will need to be agreed locally but
    might include the laboratory director, medical adviser and/or biosafety officer.




                                               • 23 •
                               LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



A. Front of card


       ILLNESS SURVEILLANCE NOTICE

       Name                                                            Card holder’s
                                                                          picture


       TO THE EMPLOYEE
       Keep this card in your possession. In case of unexplained febrile illness,
       present the card to your physician and notify one of the following in the order
       listed.

       Dr                                 Tel (Work):

                                         Tel (Home):

       Dr                                 Tel (Work):

                                         Tel (Home):




B. Back of card


       TO THE PHYSICIAN
       The holder of this card works in an area at
       in which pathogenic viruses, rickettsia, bacteria, protozoa or helminths are
       present. In the event of an unexplained febrile illness, please call the employer
       for information on agents to which this employee may have been exposed.

       Name of laboratory:

       Address:




       Tel:



Figure 5. Suggested format for medical contact card


                                             • 24 •
5. The maximum containment
   laboratory – Biosafety Level 4


The maximum containment laboratory – Biosafety Level 4 is designed for work with
Risk Group 4 microorganisms. Before such a laboratory is constructed and put into
operation, intensive consultations should be held with institutions that have had
experience of operating a similar facility. Operational maximum containment
laboratories – Biosafety Level 4 should be under the control of national or other
appropriate health authorities. The following information is intended only as
introductory material. Entities working to pursue development of a Biosafety Level 4
laboratory should contact the WHO Biosafety programme for additional information.1

Code of practice
The code of practice for Biosafety Level 3 applies except where modified as follows:
    1. The two-person rule should apply, whereby no individual ever works alone. This is
       particularly important if working in a Biosafety Level 4 suit facility.
    2. A complete change of clothing and shoes is required prior to entering and upon
       exiting the laboratory.
    3. Personnel must be trained in emergency extraction procedures in the event of
       personnel injury or illness.
    4. A method of communication for routine and emergency contacts must be
       established between personnel working within the maximum containment
       laboratory – Biosafety Level 4 and support personnel outside the laboratory.

Laboratory design and facilities
The features of a containment laboratory – Biosafety Level 3 also apply to a maximum
containment laboratory – Biosafety Level 4 with the addition of the following.
    1. Primary containment. An efficient primary containment system must be in place,
       consisting of one or a combination of the following.
       — Class III cabinet laboratory. Passage through a minimum of two doors prior to
          entering the rooms containing the Class III biological safety cabinet(s) (cabinet
          room) is required. In this laboratory configuration the Class III biological safety

1
    Biosafety programme, Department of Communicable Disease Surveillance and Response, World Health
    Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (http://www.who.int/csr/).


                                               • 25 •
                            LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



       cabinet provides the primary containment. A personnel shower with inner and
       outer changing rooms is necessary. Supplies and materials that are not brought
       into the cabinet room through the changing area are introduced through a
       double-door autoclave or fumigation chamber. Once the outer door is securely
       closed, staff inside the laboratory can open the inner door to retrieve the
       materials. The doors of the autoclave or fumigation chamber are interlocked
       in such a way that the outer door cannot open unless the autoclave has been
       operated through a sterilization cycle or the fumigation chamber has been
       decontaminated (see Chapter 10).
   — Suit laboratory. A protective suit laboratory with self-contained breathing
       apparatus differs significantly in design and facility requirements from a
       Biosafety Level 4 laboratory with Class III biological safety cabinets. The rooms
       in the protective suit laboratory are arranged so as to direct personnel through
       the changing and decontamination areas prior to entering areas where infectious
       materials are manipulated. A suit decontamination shower must be provided
       and used by personnel leaving the containment laboratory area. A separate
       personnel shower with inner and outer changing rooms is also provided.
       Personnel who enter the suit area are required to don a one-piece, positively
       pressurized, HEPA-filtered, supplied-air suit. Air to the suit must be provided
       by a system that has a 100% redundant capability with an independent source
       of air, for use in the event of an emergency. Entry into the suit laboratory is
       through an airlock fitted with airtight doors. An appropriate warning system
       for personnel working in the suit laboratory must be provided for use in the
       event of mechanical system or air failure (see Chapter 10).
2. Controlled access. The maximum containment laboratory – Biosafety Level 4 must
   be located in a separate building or in a clearly delineated zone within a secure
   building. Entry and exit of personnel and supplies must be through an airlock or
   pass-through system. On entering, personnel must put on a complete change of
   clothing; before leaving, they should shower before putting on their street clothing.
3. Controlled air system. Negative pressure must be maintained in the facility. Both
   supply and exhaust air must be HEPA-filtered. There are significant differences in
   the ventilating systems of the Class III cabinet laboratory and suit laboratory:
   — Class III cabinet laboratory. The supply air to the Class III biological safety
       cabinet(s) may be drawn from within the room through a HEPA filter mounted
       on the cabinet or supplied directly through the supply air system. Exhaust air
       from the Class III biological safety cabinet must pass through two HEPA filters
       prior to release outdoors. The cabinet must be operated at negative pressure to
       the surrounding laboratory at all times. A dedicated non-recirculating
       ventilating system for the cabinet laboratory is required.
   — Suit laboratory. Dedicated room air supply and exhaust systems are required.
       The supply and exhaust components of the ventilating system are balanced to
       provide directional airflow within the suit area from the area of least hazard to


                                         • 26 •
              5. THE MAXIMUM CONTAINMENT LABORATORY – BIOSAFETY LEVEL 4



       the area(s) of greatest potential hazard. Redundant exhaust fans are required
       to ensure that the facility remains under negative pressure at all times. The
       differential pressures within the suit laboratory and between the suit laboratory
       and adjacent areas must be monitored. Airflow in the supply and exhaust
       components of the ventilating system must be monitored, and an appropriate
       system of controls must be used to prevent pressurization of the suit laboratory.
       HEPA-filtered supply air must be provided to the suit area, decontamination
       shower and decontamination airlocks or chambers. Exhaust air from the suit
       laboratory must be passed through a series of two HEPA filters prior to release
       outdoors. Alternatively, after double HEPA filtration, exhaust air may be
       recirculated, but only within the suit laboratory. Under no circumstances shall
       the exhaust air from the Biosafety Level 4 suit laboratory be recirculated to
       other areas. Extreme caution must be exercised if recirculation of air within
       the suit laboratory is elected. Consideration must be given to the types of
       research conducted, equipment, chemicals and other materials used in the suit
       laboratory, as well as animal species that may be involved in the research.
   All HEPA filters need to be tested and certified annually. The HEPA filter housings
   are designed to allow for in situ decontamination of the filter prior to removal.
   Alternatively, the filter can be removed in a sealed, gas-tight primary container for
   subsequent decontamination and/or destruction by incineration.
4. Decontamination of effluents. All effluents from the suit area, decontamination
   chamber, decontamination shower, or Class III biological safety cabinet must be
   decontaminated before final discharge. Heat treatment is the preferred method.
   Effluents may also require correction to a neutral pH prior to discharge. Water
   from the personnel shower and toilet may be discharged directly to the sanitary
   sewer without treatment.
5. Sterilization of waste and materials. A double-door, pass-through autoclave must
   be available in the laboratory area. Other methods of decontamination must be
   available for equipment and items that cannot withstand steam sterilization.
6. Airlock entry ports for specimens, materials and animals must be provided.
7. Emergency power and dedicated power supply line(s) must be provided.
8. Containment drain(s) must be installed.
Because of the great complexity of the engineering, design and construction of Biosafety
Level 4 facilities, in either cabinet or suit configuration, schematic representations of
such facilities have not been included.
   Because of the great complexity of the work in the Biosafety Level 4 laboratory, a
separate detailed work manual should be developed and tested in training exercises.
In addition, an emergency programme must be devised (see Chapter 13). In the
preparation of this programme, active cooperation with national and local health
authorities should be established. Other emergency services, e.g. fire, police and
designated receiving hospitals, should also be involved.


                                          • 27 •
6. Laboratory animal facilities



Those who use animals for experimental and diagnostic purposes have a moral
obligation to take every care to avoid causing them unnecessary pain or suffering. The
animals must be provided with comfortable, hygienic housing and adequate wholesome
food and water. At the end of the experiment they must be dealt with in a humane
manner.
   For security reasons, the animal house should be an independent, detached unit. If
it adjoins a laboratory, the design should provide for its isolation from the public
parts of the laboratory should such need arise, and for its decontamination and
disinfestation.


Table 4. Animal facility containment levels: summary of practices and safety
        equipment
RISK GROUP        CONTAINMENT LEVEL          LABORATORY PRACTICES AND SAFETY EQUIPMENT

  1               ABSL-1                     Limited access, protective clothing and gloves.

  2               ABSL-2                     ABSL-1 practices plus: hazard warning signs. Class I
                                             or II BSCs for activities that produce aerosols.
                                             Decontamination of waste and cages before washing.

  3               ABSL-3                     ABSL-2 practices plus: controlled access. BSCs and
                                             special protective clothing for all activities.

  4               ABSL-4                     ABSL-3 plus: strictly limited access. Clothing change
                                             before entering. Class III BSCs or positive pressure
                                             suits. Shower on exit. Decontamination of all wastes
                                             before removal from facility.
ABSL, animal facility Biosafety Level; BSCs, biological safety cabinets


Animal facilities, like laboratories, may be designated according to a risk assessment
and the risk group of the microorganisms under investigation, as Animal facility
Biosafety Level 1, 2, 3 or 4.
   With respect to agents to be used in the animal laboratory, factors for consideration
include:
 1. The normal route of transmission

                                                   • 28 •
                            6. LABORATORY ANIMAL FACILITIES



2. The volumes and concentrations to be used
3. The route of inoculation
4. Whether and by what route these agents may be excreted.
With respect to animals to be used in the animal laboratory, factors for consideration
include:
1. The nature of the animals, i.e. their aggressiveness and tendency to bite and scratch
2. Their natural ecto- and endoparasites
3. The zoonotic diseases to which they are susceptible
4. The possible dissemination of allergens.
As with laboratories, the requirements for design features, equipment and precautions
increase in stringency according to the animal biosafety level. These are described
below and summarized in Table 4. These guidelines are additive, so that each higher
level incorporates the standards of the lower levels.

Animal facility – Biosafety Level 1
This is suitable for the maintenance of most stock animals after quarantine (except
nonhuman primates, regarding which national authorities should be consulted), and
for animals that are deliberately inoculated with agents in Risk Group 1. GMT are
required. The animal facility director must establish policies, procedures and protocols
for all operations, and for access to the vivarium. An appropriate medical surveillance
programme for the staff must be instituted. A safety or operations manual must be
prepared and adopted.

Animal facility – Biosafety Level 2
This is suitable for work with animals that are deliberately inoculated with micro-
organisms in Risk Group 2. The following safety precautions apply:
 1. All the requirements for animal facilities – Biosafety Level 1 must be met.
 2. Biohazard warning signs (see Figure 1) should be posted on doors and other
    appropriate places.
 3. The facility must be designed for easy cleaning and housekeeping.
 4. Doors must open inwards and be self-closing.
 5. Heating, ventilation and lighting must be adequate.
 6. If mechanical ventilation is provided, the airflow must be inwards. Exhaust air is
    discharged to the outside and should not be recirculated to any part of the building.
 7. Access must be restricted to authorized persons.
 8. No animals should be admitted other than those for experimental use.
 9. There should be an arthropod and rodent control programme.
10. Windows, if present, must be secure, resistant to breakage and, if able to be opened,
    must be fitted with arthropod-proof screens.
11. After use, work surfaces must be decontaminated with effective disinfectants (see
    Chapter 14).

                                          • 29 •
                               LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



12. Biological safety cabinets (Classes I or II) or isolator cages with dedicated air supplies
    and HEPA-filtered exhaust air must be provided for work that may involve the
    generation of aerosols.
13. An autoclave must be available on site or in appropriate proximity to the animal
    facility.
14. Animal bedding materials must be removed in a manner that minimizes the
    generation of aerosols and dust.
15. All waste materials and bedding must be decontaminated before disposal.
16. Use of sharp instruments should be restricted whenever possible. Sharps should
    always be collected in puncture-proof/-resistant containers fitted with covers and
    treated as infectious.
17. Material for autoclaving or incineration must be transported safely, in closed
    containers.
18. Animal cages must be decontaminated after use.
19. Animal carcasses should be incinerated.
20. Protective clothing and equipment must be worn in the facility, and removed on
    leaving.
21. Hand-washing facilities must be provided. Staff must wash their hands before
    leaving the animal facility.
22. All injuries, however minor, must be treated appropriately, reported and recorded.
23. Eating, drinking, smoking and application of cosmetics must be forbidden in the
    facility.
24. All personnel must receive appropriate training.

Animal facility – Biosafety Level 3
This is suitable for work with animals that are deliberately inoculated with agents in
Risk Group 3, or when otherwise indicated by a risk assessment. All systems, practices
and procedures need to be reviewed and recertified annually. The following safety
precautions apply:
 1. All the requirements for animal facilities – Biosafety Levels 1 and 2 must be met.
 2. Access must be strictly controlled.
 3. The facility must be separated from other laboratory and animal house areas by a
    room with a double-door entrance forming an anteroom.
 4. Hand-washing facilities must be provided in the anteroom.
 5. Showers should be provided in the anteroom.
 6. There must be mechanical ventilation to ensure a continuous airflow through all
    the rooms. Exhaust air must pass through HEPA filters before being discharged to
    the atmosphere without recirculation. The system must be designed to prevent
    accidental reverse flow and positive pressurization in any part of the animal house.
 7. An autoclave must be available at a location convenient for the animal house where
    the biohazard is contained. Infectious waste should be autoclaved before it is moved
    to other areas of the facility.

                                            • 30 •
                             6. LABORATORY ANIMAL FACILITIES



 8. An incinerator should be readily available on site or alternative arrangements should
    be made with the authorities concerned.
 9. Animals infected with Risk Group 3 microorganisms must be housed in cages in
    isolators or rooms with ventilation exhausts placed behind the cages.
10. Bedding should be as dust-free as possible.
11. All protective clothing must be decontaminated before it is laundered.
12. Windows must be closed and sealed, and resistant to breakage.
13. Immunization of staff, as appropriate, should be offered.

Animal facility – Biosafety Level 4
Work in this facility will normally be linked with that in the maximum containment
laboratory – Biosafety Level 4, and national and local rules and regulations must be
harmonized to apply to both. If work is to be done in a suit laboratory, additional
practices and procedures must be used over and above those described here (see
Chapter 5).
 1. All the requirements for animal facilities – Biosafety Levels 1, 2 and 3 must be met.
 2. Access must be strictly controlled; only staff designated by the director of the
    establishment should have authority to enter.
 3. Individuals must not work alone: the two-person rule must apply.
 4. Personnel must have received the highest possible level of training as microbiologists
    and be familiar with the hazards involved in their work and with the necessary
    precautions.
 5. Housing areas for animals infected with Risk Group 4 agents must maintain the
    criteria for containment described and applied for maximum containment
    laboratories – Biosafety Level 4.
 6. The facility must be entered by an airlock anteroom, the clean side of which must
    be separated from the restricted side by changing and showering facilities.
 7. Staff must remove street clothing when entering and put on special, protective
    clothing. After work they must remove the protective clothing for autoclaving, and
    shower before leaving.
 8. The facility must be ventilated by a HEPA-filtered exhaust system designed to ensure
    a negative pressure (inward directional airflow).
 9. The ventilation system must be designed to prevent reverse flow and positive-
    pressurization.
10. A double-ended autoclave with the clean end in a room outside the containment
    rooms must be provided for exchange of materials.
11. A pass-through airlock with the clean end in a room outside the containment rooms
    must be provided for exchange of non-autoclavable materials.
12. All manipulations with animals infected with Risk Group 4 agents must take place
    under maximum containment – Biosafety Level 4 conditions.
13. All animals must be housed in isolators.
14. All animal bedding and waste must be autoclaved before removal from the facility.

                                          • 31 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



15. There must be medical supervision of staff.

Invertebrates
As with vertebrates, the animal facility biosafety level will be determined by the risk
groups of the agents under investigation or when otherwise indicated by a risk
assessment. The following additional precautions are necessary with certain arthropods,
particularly with flying insects:
 1. Separate rooms should be provided for infected and noninfected invertebrates.
 2. The rooms should be capable of being sealed for fumigation.
 3. Insecticide sprays should be readily available.
 4. “Chilling” facilities should be provided to reduce, where necessary, the activity of
    invertebrates.
 5. Access should be through an anteroom containing insect traps and with arthropod-
    proof screens on the doors.
 6. All exhaust ventilation ducts and openable windows should be fitted with
    arthropod-proof screens.
 7. Waste traps on sinks and sluices should not be allowed to dry out.
 8. All waste should be decontaminated by autoclaving, as some invertebrates are not
    killed by all disinfectants.
 9. A check should be kept on the numbers of larval and adult forms of flying, crawling
    and jumping arthropods.
10. Containers for ticks and mites should stand in trays of oil.
11. Infected or potentially infected flying insects must be contained in double-netted
    cages.
12. Infected or potentially infected arthropods must be handled in biological safety
    cabinets or isolators.
13. Infected or potentially infected arthropods may be manipulated on cooling trays.
For further information see references (3–6).




                                         • 32 •
7. Guidelines for
   laboratory/facility
   commissioning

Laboratory/facility commissioning may be defined as the systematic review and
documentation process signifying that specified laboratory structural components,
systems and/or system components have been installed, inspected, functionally tested
and verified to meet national or international standards, as appropriate. The respective
building system’s design criteria and design function establish these requirements. In
other words, laboratories designated as Biosafety Levels 1–4 will have different and
increasingly complex commissioning requirements. Geographical and climatic
conditions, such as geological fault lines or extreme heat, cold or humidity may also
affect the laboratory design and therefore the commissioning requirements. Upon the
completion of the commissioning process, the pertinent structural components and
support systems will have been subjected to the various operating conditions and failure
modes that can be reasonably expected, and will have been approved.
   The commissioning process and acceptance criteria should be established early,
preferably during the programming phase of the construction or renovation project.
By acknowledging the commissioning process early in the project, architects, engineers,
safety and health personnel and ultimately the laboratory occupants understand the
performance requirements of the specific laboratory and set uniform expectations for
laboratory and/or facility performance. The commissioning process provides the
institution and the surrounding community with a greater degree of confidence that
the structural, electrical, mechanical and plumbing systems, containment and
decontamination systems, and security and alarm systems will operate as designed, to
assure containment of any potentially dangerous microorganisms being worked with
in a particular laboratory or animal facility.
   Commissioning activities generally begin during the programming phase of the
project and proceed through the construction and subsequent warranty period for
the laboratory/facility. Warranty periods should generally extend for one year following
occupancy. It is recommended that a commissioning agent is retained who is
independent of the architectural, engineering and construction firms involved in the
design and construction. The commissioning agent serves as an advocate for the
institution constructing or renovating the laboratory and should be considered as a
member of the design team; involvement of the agent in the early programming phase
of the project is essential. In some cases, the institution may act as its own
commissioning agent. In the case of more complex laboratory facilities (Biosafety


                                         • 33 •
                            LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Levels 3 or 4), the institution may wish to retain an outside commissioning agent who
has demonstrated experience and success in the commissioning of complex biosafety
laboratory and animal facilities. When an independent commissioning agent is used,
the institution should still be a member of the commissioning team. It is recommended
that, in addition to the commissioning agent, the institution’s Safety Officer, Project
Officer, Programme Manager and a representative of the Operations and Maintenance
staff are also part of the team.
   The following is a list of laboratory systems and components that may be included
in a commissioning plan for functional testing, depending on the containment level
of the facility being renovated or constructed. The list is not exhaustive. Obviously,
the actual commissioning plan will reflect the complexity of the laboratory being
planned.
 1. Building automation systems including links to remote monitoring and control
    sites
 2. Electronic surveillance and detection systems
 3. Electronic security locks and proximity device readers
 4. Heating, ventilation (supply and exhaust) and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems
 5. High-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration systems
 6. HEPA decontamination systems
 7. HVAC and exhaust air system controls and control interlocks
 8. Airtight isolation dampers
 9. Laboratory refrigeration systems
10. Boilers and steam systems
11. Fire detection, suppression and alarm systems
12. Domestic water backflow prevention devices
13. Processed water systems (i.e. reverse osmosis, distilled water)
14. Liquid effluent treatment and neutralization systems
15. Plumbing drain primer systems
16. Chemical decontaminant systems
17. Medical laboratory gas systems
18. Breathing air systems
19. Service and instrument air systems
20. Cascading pressure differential verification of laboratories and support areas
21. Local area network (LAN) and computer data systems
22. Normal power systems
23. Emergency power systems
24. Uninterruptible power systems
25. Emergency lighting systems
26. Lighting fixture penetration seals
27. Electrical and mechanical penetration seals
28. Telephone systems


                                         • 34 •
                 7. GUIDELINES FOR LABORATORY/FACILITY COMMISSIONING



29. Airlock door control interlocks
30. Airtight door seals
31. Window and vision-panel penetration seals
32. Barrier pass-through penetration
33. Structural integrity verification: concrete floors, walls and ceilings
34. Barrier coating verification: floors, walls and ceilings
35. Biosafety Level 4 containment envelope pressurization and isolation functions
36. Biological safety cabinets
37. Autoclaves
38. Liquid nitrogen system and alarms
39. Water detection systems (e.g. in case of flooding inside containment zone)
40. Decontamination shower and chemical additive systems
41. Cage-wash and neutralization systems
42. Waste management.




                                        • 35 •
8. Guidelines for
   laboratory/facility
   certification

Laboratories are complex and dynamic environments. Today’s biomedical research
and clinical laboratories must be able to adapt quickly to continuously increasing public
health needs and pressures. An example of this is the need for laboratories to adjust
priorities to meet the challenges of emerging or re-emerging infectious diseases. In
order to assure that adaptation and maintenance are undertaken promptly and in an
appropriate and safe manner, all biological research and clinical laboratories should
be regularly certified. Laboratory certification helps to ensure that:
1. Proper engineering controls are being used and are functioning adequately as
   designed
2. Appropriate site and protocol specific administrative controls are in place
3. Personal protective equipment is appropriate for the tasks being performed
4. Decontamination of waste and materials has been adequately considered and proper
   waste management procedures are in place
5. Proper procedures for general laboratory safety, including physical, electrical and
   chemical safety are in place.
Laboratory certification differs from laboratory commissioning activities (Chapter 7)
in several important ways. Laboratory certification is the systematic examination of
all safety features and processes within the laboratory (engineering controls, personal
protective equipment and administrative controls). Biosafety practices and procedures
are also examined. Laboratory certification is an on-going quality and safety assurance
activity that should take place on a regular basis.
    Adequately trained safety and health or biosafety professionals may conduct
laboratory certification activities. Institutions may employ personnel having the
appropriate skill-set required for conducting audits, surveys or inspections (these terms
are used interchangeably) associated with the certification process. However,
institutions may consider engaging or be required to engage a third party to provide
these services.
    Biomedical research and clinical laboratory facilities may develop audit, survey or
inspection tools to help ensure consistency in the certification process. These tools
should be flexible enough to allow for the physical and procedural differences between
laboratories necessitated by the type of work being conducted, while at the same time
providing a consistent approach within the institution. Care must be taken to ensure


                                          • 36 •
                      8. GUIDELINES FOR LABORATORY/FACILITY CERTIFICATION



that these tools are used only by appropriately trained personnel, and that they are not
used as a substitute for a sound professional biosafety assessment. Examples of such
tools are provided in Tables 5–7.
   Findings of the audit, survey or inspection should be discussed with laboratory
personnel and management. Within the laboratory, an individual should be identified
and made responsible for ensuring that corrective actions are taken for all deficiencies
identified during the audit process. Certification of the laboratory should not be
completed, and the laboratory should not be declared functional, until deficiencies
have been adequately addressed.
   The complexity of Biosafety Level 4 laboratory operations goes beyond the scope
of this manual. For details and further information, please contact the WHO Biosafety
programme1 (see also Annex 3).




1
    WHO Biosafety programme, Department of Communicable Disease Surveillance and Response, World
    Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (http://www.who.int/csr/).


                                              • 37 •
                                                       LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Table 5. Basic Laboratory – Biosafety Level 1: laboratory safety survey

Location       ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○        ○       ○       ○   ○   ○    ○   ○       Date     ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○




Person in charge of laboratory                         ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○        ○       ○       ○       ○   ○    ○   ○   ○    ○   ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○




CHECKED ITEM (ENTER DATE OF CHECK)                                                                      YES                         NO           N/A                      COMMENTS

Laboratory                                                                                                                                                            Biosafety Level:
Proper signage: ultraviolet light, laser,                                                                                                                             Attach the appropriate
   radioactive material, etc. ........................                                                                                                             Biosafety Level Survey
Appropriate biosafety guidelines available                                                                                                                            Form
   and followed ...........................................                                                                                    
Laboratory equipment properly labelled
   (biohazardous, radioactive, toxic, etc.) ..                                                                                                 
Laboratory design
Designed for easy cleaning .........................                                                                                           
Room ultraviolet lights on interlock switch                                                                                                    
All shelves secured .....................................                                                                                      
Bench-tops waterproof and resistant to
    acids, alkali, organic solvents and heat .                                                                                                 
Adequate illumination provided ..................                                                                                              
Adequate storage space available and
    appropriately used .................................                                                                                       
Gas cylinders
All cylinders secured ...................................                                                                                      
Caps on reserve cylinders ...........................                                                                                          
Asphyxiating and hazardous gases only in
    ventilated rooms ....................................                                                                                      
Excess or empty cylinders present .............                                                                                                
Chemicals
Flammables stored in flammable storage
    cabinet ....................................................                                                                               
Peroxide formers double-dated (received
    and opened) ...........................................                                                                                    
Chemicals properly segregated ...................                                                                                              
Hazardous chemicals stored above eye
    level ........................................................                                                                             
Chemicals stored on the floor .....................                                                                                            
Chemical containers left open .....................                                                                                            
All solutions properly labelled .....................                                                                                          
Mercury thermometers in use ....................                                                                                               
Refrigerators/freezers/cold rooms
Food for human consumption present .......                                                                                                     
Flammables in explosion-proof/-safe units                                                                                                      
Labelled externally if containing
   carcinogens, radioactivity and/or
   biohazards ..............................................                                                                                   
Cold-room has emergency release .............                                                                                                  




                                                                                                       • 38 •
                              8. GUIDELINES FOR LABORATORY/FACILITY CERTIFICATION




CHECKED ITEM (ENTER DATE OF CHECK)                                   YES     NO   N/A   COMMENTS

Electrical equipment
Extension cords present .............................                           
Outlets earthed/grounded and with
   proper polarity .......................................                      
Connections by sinks, under showers,
   etc. .........................................................               
Equipment with frayed or damaged
   wiring .....................................................                 
Overloaded outlets or electrical strips ........                                
Power strips mounted off the floor .............                                
Proper fuses in conduits .............................                          
Electrical outlets near water sources meet
   local codes .............................................                    
Earths/grounds present on electrical cords                                      
Portable space heaters ................................                         
Personal protective equipment
Eyewash available in laboratory ..................                              
Safety shower available ..............................                          
Personal protective equipment available
   (gloves, gowns, goggles, etc.) ...............                               
Occupants properly attired .........................                            
Laboratory coats, gowns, smocks, gloves
   and other personal protective clothing
   not worn outside the laboratory .............                                
Personal protective equipment available
   for cryogenic storage .............................                          
Waste management
Evidence of improper waste disposal .........                                   
Wastes segregated in proper containers ....                                     
Chemical waste containers tagged, labelled,
   dated and kept closed ............................                           
Chemical waste containers appropriately
   handled and stored ................................                          
Sharps containers used and disposed of
   properly ..................................................                  
No trash on floor .........................................                     
Waste disposal procedures posted in
   laboratory ...............................................                   
Occupational health and safety programmes available
Hazard communication ...............................                            
Respiratory protection ................................                         
Hearing conservation ..................................                         
Formaldehyde monitoring ...........................                             
Ethylene oxide monitoring ..........................                            
Anaesthetic gas monitoring ........................                             




                                                                    • 39 •
                                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




CHECKED ITEM (ENTER DATE OF CHECK)                                    YES         NO     N/A      COMMENTS

General engineering controls
Laboratory airflow is negative to general
   occupancy, corridor and office areas .....                                          
Cup sinks or drains acting as vents ............                                       
Sink available for hand-washing .................                                      
Exposed machine parts (pulleys, gears) .....                                           
Vacuum line has filters and traps on
   laboratory benches ................................                                 
Backflow hazards to water supply ..............                                        
Distilled water systems in good condition ..                                           
Active and effective arthropod and rodent
   control programme ................................                                  
General practices and procedures
Food for human consumption stored
   outside the laboratory ............................                                 
Microwave oven(s) clearly labelled “No
   Food Preparation, Laboratory Use Only”                                              
Eating, drinking, smoking and/or applying
   of cosmetics occurring in the laboratory                                            
Pressurized glass containers taped or
   shielded (i.e. vacuum traps) ..................                                     
Mouth pipetting prohibited .........................                                   
Mechanical pipetting devices available
   and used .................................................                          
Protective laboratory clothing stored
   separately from street clothing ..............                                      
General laboratory housekeeping
Glass containers stored on the floor ...........                                       
Trip hazards evident ....................................                              
Clean absorbent pads on work surfaces .....                                            
Broken glassware handled by mechanical
   means (brush and dustpan, tongs, etc.)                                              
Fire protection
Sprinkler heads free and unobstructed .......                                          
Open penetrations in walls, ceiling, floor, etc.                                       
Wiring or tubing through door openings ....                                            
Minimum passage width of 1 m in laboratory                                             
Storage observed on ductwork or light fixtures                                         
Excess combustibles stored in laboratory ..                                            
Heated constant temperature baths
Equipped with low water level and
  overheat shutoff .....................................                               
Constructed of noncombustible materials ..                                             


Safety surveyor’s signature:             ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○    ○   ○   ○   Date survey completed:   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○




                                                                     • 40 •
                                   8. GUIDELINES FOR LABORATORY/FACILITY CERTIFICATION



Table 6. Basic laboratory – Biosafety Level 2: laboratory safety survey.
         This form is used in conjunction with the Biosafety Level 1 laboratory safety
         survey form

Location       ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○        ○       ○       ○   ○   ○    ○   ○       Date     ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○




Person in charge of laboratory                         ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○        ○       ○       ○       ○   ○    ○   ○   ○    ○   ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○




CHECKED ITEM (ENTER DATE OF CHECK)                                                                      YES                         NO           N/A                      COMMENTS

Biological safety cabinet (BSC)                                                                                                                                           Date:
Certification within last year .......................                                                                                         
BSC surface wiped down with appropriate .                                                                                                                                 Location:
   disinfectant at beginning and end of
   each procedure ......................................                                                                                                               Brand:
Front grill and exhaust filter unobstructed ..                                                                                                 
Open flames used inside cabinet ................                                                                                                                       Type:
Vacuum lines have in-line filters and
   disinfectant traps in use .........................                                                                                                                 Serial no.:
BSC compromised by room air or location                                                                                                        
BSC used when there is potential for
   creating aerosols ....................................                                                                                      
Laboratory
Access limited and restricted to authorized
    personnel ...............................................                                                                                  
Entry limited to personnel advised of all
    potential hazards ....................................                                                                                     
Biohazard sign posted on laboratory door
    as appropriate ........................................                                                                                    
    • Information on sign accurate and
       current ..............................................                                                                                  
    • Sign legible and not defaced .............                                                                                               
All doors closed ..........................................                                                                                    
Decontamination
Decontaminant specific to the organism(s)
    in use ......................................................                                                                              
All spills and accidents involving infectious
    materials reported to the laboratory
    supervisor ..............................................                                                                                  
Appropriate decontaminant used during
    spill clean-ups ........................................                                                                                   
Work surfaces decontaminated before and
    after each procedure, daily and after
    spills .......................................................                                                                             
Handling of contaminated waste
Infectious waste containers properly used ....                                                                                                 
Containers not overfilled .............................                                                                                        
Containers properly labelled and closed .....                                                                                                  
Culture stocks and other regulated waste
   properly decontaminated before disposal                                                                                                     



                                                                                                       • 41 •
                                               LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




CHECKED ITEM (ENTER DATE OF CHECK)                                      YES         NO     N/A      COMMENTS

Materials decontaminated outside the
  laboratory transported in closed,
  durable, leakproof containers according
  to local rules and regulations .................                                       
Mixed waste biologically decontaminated
  prior to disposal as chemical or
  radiological waste ..................................                                  
Personal protection
Laboratory personnel reminded of
   appropriate immunizations/tests for
   agents handled .......................................                                
Appropriate medical services contacted for
   medical evaluations, surveillance and
   treatment of occupational exposures .....                                             
Gloves worn when handling infectious
   material or contaminated equipment .....                                              
Face protection provided when working
   outside the BSC with infectious material                                              
Hands washed after removing gloves, after
   working with infectious agents, before
   leaving the laboratory ............................                                   
Antimicrobial agent available for immediate
   first aid ...................................................                         
Practices
BSC used when potential for creating
   infectious aerosols/splashes exists .......                                           
Biosafety manual prepared and adopted ....                                               
Personnel read, review and follow the
   instructions on practices and procedures,
   including safety or operations manual
   (required for all personnel annually) ......                                          
Procedures performed so as to minimize
   aerosols/splashes ..................................                                  
Needle-locking syringes/single-use needle-
   syringe units used with infectious agents                                             
Centrifuge cups and rotors opened only in
   a BSC ......................................................                          
Infectious specimens transported outside
   a BSC in approved containers following
   approved transport regulations ..............                                         
Facility
Hand-washing sink available near
  laboratory exit ........................................                               


Safety surveyor’s signature:               ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○    ○   ○   ○   Date survey completed:   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○




                                                                       • 42 •
                                 8. GUIDELINES FOR LABORATORY/FACILITY CERTIFICATION



Table 7. Containment laboratory – Biosafety Level 3: laboratory safety survey.
         This form is used in conjunction with the Bioafety Level 1 and Biosafety
         Level 2 laboratory safety survey forms

Location     ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○   ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○        ○       ○       ○   ○    ○   ○   ○       Date     ○       ○       ○       ○       ○           ○       ○       ○       ○       ○   ○   ○




Person in charge of laboratory                           ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○        ○       ○       ○       ○    ○   ○   ○   ○    ○   ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○   ○   ○




CHECKED ITEM (ENTER DATE OF CHECK)                                                                        YES                         NO           N/A                      COMMENTS

Facility
Laboratory separated from unrestricted
    traffic flow in building ............................                                                                                        
Access to laboratory through an anteroom
    with self-closing doors ..........................                                                                                           
All penetrations in laboratory sealed or
    sealable for decontamination .................                                                                                               
Room exhaust air single-pass and
    exhausted away from occupied areas ....                                                                                                      
Controlled ventilation system to monitor
    directional airflow available ....................                                                                                           
Personal protection
Closed-front gowns worn in laboratory ......                                                                                                     
Protective laboratory clothing worn only in
   laboratory areas .....................................                                                                                        
Hand-washing sink foot, elbow or
   automatically controlled .........................                                                                                            
Hand protection
Double gloves worn when handling infectious
  material, potentially contaminated
  equipment and work surfaces ................                                                                                                   
Respiratory protection
Respiratory protection worn by all personnel
  in the laboratory when aerosols are not
  safely contained in a BSC .......................                                                                                              
Practices
Mucous membrane protection provided
    when working with infectious material
    outside a BSC .........................................                                                                                      
Personnel advised of special hazards
    associated with the agent(s) ..................                                                                                              
Personnel required to read and follow all
    instructions on practices and procedures,
    including safety or operations manual ...                                                                                                    
Personnel receive annual updates/additional
    training for procedural changes .............                                                                                                
All contaminated waste autoclaved prior to
    disposal ..................................................                                                                                  


Safety surveyor’s signature:                     ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○        ○       ○           ○
                                                                                                                                      Date survey completed:                                            ○       ○       ○       ○       ○       ○   ○




                                                                                                         • 43 •
                 PART II
Laboratory biosecurity
9. Laboratory biosecurity concepts



The Laboratory biosafety manual has in the past focused on traditional biosafety
guidance for laboratories. The manual emphasizes the use of good microbiological
work practices, appropriate containment equipment, proper facility design, operation
and maintenance, and administrative considerations to minimize the risk of worker
injury or illness. In following these recommendations, the risk to the environment
and surrounding community-at-large is also minimized. It has now become necessary
to expand this traditional approach to biosafety through the introduction of laboratory
biosecurity measures. Global events in the recent past have highlighted the need to
protect laboratories and the materials they contain from being intentionally
compromised in ways that may harm people, livestock, agriculture or the environment.
Before the laboratory biosecurity needs of a facility can be defined, however, it is
important to understand the distinction between “laboratory biosafety” and “laboratory
biosecurity”.
   “Laboratory biosafety” is the term used to describe the containment principles,
technologies and practices that are implemented to prevent unintentional exposure
to pathogens and toxins, or their accidental release. “Laboratory biosecurity” refers to
institutional and personal security measures designed to prevent the loss, theft, misuse,
diversion or intentional release of pathogens and toxins.
   Effective biosafety practices are the very foundation of laboratory biosecurity
activities. Through risk assessments, performed as an integral part of an institution’s
biosafety programme, information is gathered regarding the type of organisms
available, their physical location, the personnel who require access to them, and the
identification of those responsible for them. This information can be used to assess
whether an institution possesses biological materials that are attractive to those who
may wish to use them improperly. National standards should be developed that
recognize and address the ongoing responsibility of countries and institutions to protect
specimens, pathogens and toxins from misuse.
   A specific laboratory biosecurity programme must be prepared and implemented
for each facility according to the requirements of the facility, the type of laboratory
work conducted, and the local conditions. Consequently, laboratory biosecurity
activities should be representative of the institution’s various needs and should include
input from scientific directors, principal investigators, biosafety officers, laboratory



                                          • 47 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



scientific staff, maintenance staff, administrators, information technology staff, and
law enforcement agencies and security staff if appropriate.
    Laboratory biosecurity measures should be based on a comprehensive programme
of accountability for pathogens and toxins that includes an updated inventory with
storage location, identification of personnel with access, description of use,
documentation of internal and external transfers within and between facilities, and
any inactivation and/or disposal of the materials. Likewise, an institutional laboratory
biosecurity protocol should be established for identifying, reporting, investigating and
remediating breaches in laboratory biosecurity, including discrepancies in inventory
results. The involvement and roles and responsibilities of public health and security
authorities in the event of a security infraction must be clearly defined.
    Laboratory biosecurity training, distinct from laboratory biosafety training, should
be provided to all personnel. Such training should help personnel understand the
need for protection of such materials and the rationale for the specific biosecurity
measures, and should include a review of relevant national standards and institution-
specific procedures. Procedures describing the security roles and responsibilities of
personnel in the event of a security infraction should also be presented during training.
    The professional and ethical suitability for working with dangerous pathogens of
all personnel who have regular authorized access to sensitive materials is also central
to effective laboratory biosecurity activities.
    In summary, security precautions should become a routine part of laboratory work,
just as have aseptic techniques and other safe microbiological practices. Laboratory
biosecurity measures should not hinder the efficient sharing of reference materials,
clinical and epidemiological specimens and related information necessary for clinical
or public health investigations. Competent security management should not unduly
interfere with the day-to-day activities of scientific personnel or be an impediment to
conducting research. Legitimate access to important research and clinical materials
must be preserved. Assessment of the suitability of personnel, security-specific training
and rigorous adherence to pathogen protection procedures are reasonable means of
enhancing laboratory biosecurity. All such efforts must be established and maintained
through regular risk and threat assessments, and regular review and updating of
procedures. Checks for compliance with these procedures, with clear instructions on
roles, responsibilities and remedial actions, should be integral to laboratory biosecurity
programmes and national standards for laboratory biosecurity.




                                          • 48 •
               PART III
Laboratory equipment
10. Biological safety cabinets



Biological safety cabinets (BSCs) are designed to protect the operator, the laboratory
environment and work materials from exposure to infectious aerosols and splashes
that may be generated when manipulating materials containing infectious agents, such
as primary cultures, stocks and diagnostic specimens. Aerosol particles are created by
any activity that imparts energy into a liquid or semiliquid material, such as shaking,
pouring, stirring or dropping liquid onto a surface or into another liquid. Other
laboratory activities, such as streaking agar plates, inoculating cell culture flasks with
a pipette, using a multichannel pipette to dispense liquid suspensions of infectious
agents into microculture plates, homogenizing and vortexing infectious materials, and
centrifugation of infectious liquids, or working with animals, can generate infectious
aerosols. Aerosol particles of less than 5 µm in diameter and small droplets of 5–100 µm
in diameter are not visible to the naked eye. The laboratory worker is generally not
aware that such particles are being generated and may be inhaled or may cross-
contaminate work surface materials. BSCs, when properly used, have been shown to
be highly effective in reducing laboratory-acquired infections and cross-contaminations
of cultures due to aerosol exposures. BSCs also protect the environment.
   Over the years the basic design of BSCs has undergone several modifications. A
major change was the addition of a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter to the
exhaust system. The HEPA filter traps 99.97% of particles of 0.3 µm in diameter and
99.99% of particles of greater or smaller size. This enables the HEPA filter to effectively
trap all known infectious agents and ensure that only microbe-free exhaust air is
discharged from the cabinet. A second design modification was to direct HEPA-filtered
air over the work surface, providing protection of work surface materials from
contamination. This feature is often referred to as product protection. These basic
design concepts have led to the evolution of three classes of BSCs. The type of protection
provided by each is set out in Table 8.
   Note. Horizontal and vertical outflow cabinets (“clean-air work stations”) are not
biological safety cabinets and should not be used as such.

Class I biological safety cabinet
Figure 6 provides a schematic diagram of a Class I BSC. Room air is drawn in through
the front opening at a minimum velocity of 0.38 m/s, it passes over the work surface
and is discharged from the cabinet through the exhaust duct. The directional flow of


                                           • 51 •
                                LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Table 8. Selection of a biological safety cabinet (BSC), by type of protection needed
TYPE OF PROTECTION                              BSC SELECTION

Personnel protection, microorganisms            Class I, Class II, Class III
in Risk Groups 1–3
Personnel protection, microorganisms            Class III
in Risk Group 4, glove-box laboratory
Personnel protection, microorganisms            Class I, Class II
in Risk Group 4, suit laboratory
Product protection                              Class II, Class III only if laminar flow included
Volatile radionuclide/chemical protection,      Class IIB1, Class IIA2 vented to the outside
minute amounts
Volatile radionuclide/chemical protection       Class I, Class IIB2, Class III




air whisks aerosol particles that may be generated on the work surface away from the
laboratory worker and into the exhaust duct. The front opening allows the operator’s
arms to reach the work surface inside the cabinet while he or she observes the work
surface through a glass window. The window can also be fully raised to provide access
to the work surface for cleaning or other purposes.
   The air from the cabinet is exhausted through a HEPA filter: (a) into the laboratory




                                                                                            C


                                                    B                                       D
                                                 A




                     room air
                                                                               WHO 02.135




                     potentially contaminated air
                     HEPA-filtered air
                                                            side view

Figure 6. Schematic diagram of a Class I biological safety cabinet.
          A, front opening; B, sash; C, exhaust HEPA filter; D, exhaust plenum.


                                             • 52 •
                             10. BIOLOGICAL SAFETY CABINETS



and then to the outside of the building through the building exhaust; (b) to the outside
through the building exhaust; or (c) directly to the outside. The HEPA filter may be
located in the exhaust plenum of the BSC or in the building exhaust. Some Class I
BSCs are equipped with an integral exhaust fan, whereas others rely on the exhaust
fan in the building exhaust system.
    The Class I BSC was the first recognized BSC and, because of its simple design, is
still in wide use throughout the world. It has the advantage of providing personnel
and environmental protection and can also be used for work with radionuclides and
volatile toxic chemicals. Because unsterilized room air is drawn over the work surface
through the front opening, it is not considered to provide consistently reliable product
protection.

Class II biological safety cabinets
As the use of cell and tissue cultures for the propagation of viruses and other purposes
grew, it was no longer considered satisfactory for unsterilized room air to pass over
the work surface. The Class II BSC was designed not only to provide personnel
protection but also to protect work surface materials from contaminated room air.
Class II BSCs, of which there are four types (A1, A2, B1 and B2), differ from Class I
BSCs by allowing only air from a HEPA-filtered (sterile) supply to flow over the work
surface. The Class II BSC can be used for working with infectious agents in Risk
Groups 2 and 3. Class II BSCs can be used for working with infectious agents in Risk
Group 4 when positive-pressure suits are used.

Class II type A1 biological safety cabinet
The Class II type A1 BSC is shown in Figure 7. An internal fan draws room air (supply
air) into the cabinet through the front opening and into the front intake grill. The
inflow velocity of this air should be at least 0.38 m/s at the face of the front opening.
The supply air then passes through a supply HEPA filter before flowing downwards
over the work surface. As the air flows downwards it “splits” about 6–18 cm from the
work surface, one half of the downwards flowing air passing through the front exhaust
grill, and the other half passing through the rear exhaust grill. Any aerosol particles
generated at the work surface are immediately captured in this downward airflow and
passed through the front or rear exhaust grills, thereby providing the highest level of
product protection. The air is then discharged through the rear plenum into the space
between the supply and exhaust filters located at the top of the cabinet. Owing to the
relative size of these filters, about 70% of the air recirculates through the supply HEPA
filter back into the work zone; the remaining 30% passes through the exhaust filter
into the room or to the outside.
    Air from the Class IIA1 BSC exhaust can be recirculated to the room or discharged
to the outside of the building through a thimble connection to a dedicated duct or
through the building exhaust system.
    Recirculating the exhaust air to the room has the advantage of lowering building


                                          • 53 •
                                      LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




                                                               C
                                                                                       D

                                                                   E

                                                                   B

                                                                   A
                 WHO 02.137




                                                                       F

                                         front view                        side view
                              room air
                              potentially contaminated air
                              HEPA-filtered air


Figure 7. Schematic representation of a Class IIA1 biological safety cabinet.
          A, front opening; B, sash; C, exhaust HEPA filter; D, rear plenum; E, supply HEPA filter;
          F, blower.


fuel costs because heated and/or cooled air is not being passed to the outside
environment. A connection to a ducted exhaust system also allows some BSCs to be
used for work with volatile radionuclides and volatile toxic chemicals (Table 8).

Class II type A2 vented to the outside, B1 and B2 biological safety cabinets
Class IIA2 vented to the outside, IIB1 (Figure 8) and IIB2 BSCs are variations of the
type IIA1. Their characteristics, along with those of Class I and Class III BSCs, are
indicated in Table 9. Each variation allows the BSC to be used for specialized purposes
(see Table 8). These BSCs differ from one another in several aspects: the air intake
velocity through the front opening; the amount of air recirculated over the work surface
and exhausted from the cabinet; the exhaust system, which determines whether air
from the cabinet is exhausted to the room, or to the outside, through a dedicated
exhaust system or through the building exhaust; and the pressure arrangements
(whether cabinets have biologically contaminated ducts and plenums under negative
pressure, or have biological contaminated ducts and plenums surrounded by negative-
pressure ducts and plenums).
   Complete descriptions of the various Class IIA and IIB BSCs can be obtained from
references (7) and (8), and from manufacturers’ brochures.


                                                      • 54 •
                                                10. BIOLOGICAL SAFETY CABINETS




                                                                                    C




                                                                               D                    E
                                                                               B
                                                                               A



                                                                                   G
                     WHO 02.138




                                                 F                                  F

                                                    front view                          side view
                                         room air
                                         potentially contaminated air
                                         HEPA-filtered air


Figure 8. Schematic diagram of a Class IIB1 biological safety cabinet.
          A, front opening; B, sash: C, exhaust HEPA filter; D, supply HEPA filter; E, negative-
          pressure exhaust plenum; F, blower; G, HEPA filter for supply air. Connection of the
          cabinet exhaust to the building exhaust air system is required.



Table 9. Differences between Class I, II and III biological safety cabinets (BSCs)
BSC             FACE VELOCITY (m/s)                              AIRFLOW (%)               EXHAUST SYSTEM

                                                     RECIRCULATED          EXHAUSTED

       a
Class I               0.36                                  0                  100         Hard duct
Class IIA1         0.38–0.51                               70                   30         Exhaust to room or thimble
                                                                                           connection
Class IIA2                        0.51                     70                  30          Exhaust to room or thimble
vented to the                                                                              connection
outsidea
Class IIB1a                       0.51                     30                   70         Hard duct
Class IIB2a                       0.51                      0                  100         Hard duct
Class IIIa                         NA                       0                  100         Hard duct
NA, not applicable.
a
  All biologically contaminated ducts are under negative pressure or are surrounded by negative pressure
  ducts and plenums.




                                                                  • 55 •
                              LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Class III biological safety cabinet
This type (Figure 9) provides the highest level of personnel protection and is used for
Risk Group 4 agents. All penetrations are sealed “gas tight”. Supply air is HEPA-filtered
and exhaust air passes through two HEPA filters. Airflow is maintained by a dedicated
exhaust system exterior to the cabinet, which keeps the cabinet interior under negative
pressure (about 124.5 Pa). Access to the work surface is by means of heavy duty rubber
gloves, which are attached to ports in the cabinet. The Class III BSC should have an
attached pass-through box that can be sterilized and is equipped with a HEPA-filtered
exhaust. The Class III cabinet may be connected to a double-door autoclave used to
decontaminate all materials entering or exiting the cabinet. Several glove boxes can be
joined together to extend the work surface. Class III BSCs are suitable for work in
Biosafety Level 3 and 4 laboratories.

Biological safety cabinet air connections
A “thimble” or “canopy hood” is designed for use with Class IIA1 and IIA2 vented to
the outside BSCs. The thimble fits over the cabinet exhaust housing, sucking the cabinet
exhaust air into the building exhaust ducts. A small opening, usually 2.5 cm in diameter,




                       C                                   D         C


                                                               B



                   E
                    F                                      A
                                                                               WHO 02.136




                                  front view                       side view

                            room air
                            potentially contaminated air
                            HEPA-filtered air

Figure 9. Schematic representation of a Class III biological safety cabinet (glove box).
          A, glove ports for arm-length gloves; B, sash; C, double-exhaust HEPA filters;
          D, supply HEPA filter; E, double-ended autoclave or pass-through box; F, chemical
          dunk tank. Connection of the cabinet exhaust to an independent building exhaust air
          system is required.


                                               • 56 •
                            10. BIOLOGICAL SAFETY CABINETS



is maintained between the thimble and the cabinet exhaust housing. This small opening
enables room air to be sucked into the building exhaust system as well. The building
exhaust capacity must be sufficient to capture both room air and the cabinet exhaust.
The thimble must be removable or be designed to allow for operational testing of the
cabinet. Generally, the performance of a thimble-connected BSC is not affected much
by fluctuations in the airflow of the building
   Class IIB1 and IIB2 BSCs are hard-ducted, i.e. firmly connected without any
openings, to the building exhaust system or, preferably, to a dedicated exhaust duct
system. The building exhaust system must be precisely matched to the airflow
requirements specified by the manufacturer for both volume and static pressure.
Certification of hard-duct connected BSCs is more time-consuming than that for BSCs
that recirculate air to the room or which are thimble-connected.

Selection of a biological safety cabinet
A BSC should be selected primarily in accordance with the type of protection needed:
product protection; personnel protection against Risk Group 1–4 microorganisms;
personnel protection against exposure to radionuclides and volatile toxic chemicals;
or a combination of these. Table 8 shows which BSCs are recommended for each type
of protection.
   Volatile or toxic chemicals should not be used in BSCs that recirculate exhaust air
to the room, i.e. Class I BSCs that are not ducted to building exhaust systems, or
Class IIA1 or Class IIA2 cabinets. Class IIB1 BSCs are acceptable for work with minute
amounts of volatile chemicals and radionuclides. A Class IIB2 BSC, also called a total
exhaust cabinet, is necessary when significant amounts of radionuclides and volatile
chemicals are expected to be used.

Using biological safety cabinets in the laboratory
Location
The velocity of air flowing through the front opening into a BSC is about 0.45 m/s. At
this velocity the integrity of the directional air inflow is fragile and can be easily
disrupted by air currents generated by people walking close to the BSC, open windows,
air supply registers, and opening and shutting doors. Ideally, BSCs should be situated
in a location remote from traffic and potentially disturbing air currents. Whenever
possible a 30-cm clearance should be provided behind and on each side of the cabinet
to allow easy access for maintenance. A clearance of 30–35 cm above the cabinet may
be required to provide for accurate air velocity measurement across the exhaust filter
and for exhaust filter changes.

Operators
If BSCs are not used properly, their protective benefits may be greatly diminished.
Operators need to be careful to maintain the integrity of the front opening air inflow
when moving their arms into and out of cabinets. Arms should be moved in and out


                                        • 57 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



slowly, perpendicular to the front opening. Manipulations of materials within BSCs
should be delayed for about 1 min after placing hands and arms inside to allow the
cabinet to adjust and to “air sweep” the surface of the hands and arms. The number of
movements across the front opening should also be minimized by placing all necessary
items into the cabinet before beginning manipulations.

Material placement
The front intake grill of Class II BSCs must not be blocked with paper, equipment or
other items. Materials to be placed inside the cabinet should be surface-decontaminated
with 70% alcohol. Work may be performed on disinfectant-soaked absorbent towels
to capture splatters and splashes. All materials should be placed as far back in the
cabinet, towards the rear edge of the work surface, as practical without blocking the
rear grill. Aerosol-generating equipment (e.g. mixers, centrifuges, etc.) should be placed
towards the rear of the cabinet. Bulky items, such as biohazard bags, discard pipette
trays and suction collection flasks should be placed to one side of the interior of the
cabinet. Active work should flow from clean to contaminated areas across the work
surface.
   The autoclavable biohazard collection bag and pipette collection tray should not
be placed outside the cabinet. The frequent in-and-out movement needed to use these
containers is disruptive to the integrity of the cabinet’s air barrier, and can compromise
both personnel and product protection.

Operation and maintenance
Most BSCs are designed to permit operation 24 h/day, and investigators find that
continuous operation helps to control the levels of dust and particulate materials in
the laboratory. Class IIA1 and IIA2 BSCs exhausting to the room or connected by
thimble connections to dedicated exhaust ducts can be turned off when not in use.
Other types such as IIB1 and IIB2 BSCs, which have hard-duct installations, must
have airflow through them at all times to help maintain room air balance. Cabinets
should be turned on at least 5 min before beginning work and after completion of
work to allow the cabinet to “purge”, i.e. to allow time for contaminated air to be
removed from the cabinet environment.
   All repairs made on BSCs should be made by a qualified technician. Any malfunction
in the operation of the BSC should be reported and repaired before the BSC is used
again.

Ultraviolet lights
Ultraviolet lights are not required in BSCs. If they are used, they must be cleaned
weekly to remove any dust and dirt that may block the germicidal effectiveness of the
light. Ultraviolet light intensity should be checked when the cabinet is recertified to
ensure that light emission is appropriate. Ultraviolet lights must be turned off while
the room is occupied, to protect eyes and skin from inadvertent exposure.


                                          • 58 •
                             10. BIOLOGICAL SAFETY CABINETS



Open flames
Open flames should be avoided in the near microbe-free environment created inside
the BSC. They disrupt the airflow patterns and can be dangerous when volatile,
flammable substances are also used. To sterilize bacteriological loops, microburners
or electric “furnaces” are available and are preferable to open flames.

Spills
A copy of the laboratory’s protocol for handling spills should be posted, read and
understood by everyone who uses the laboratory. When a spill of biohazardous material
occurs within a BSC, clean-up should begin immediately, while the cabinet continues
to operate. An effective disinfectant should be used and applied in a manner that
minimizes the generation of aerosols. All materials that come into contact with the
spilled agent should be disinfected and/or autoclaved.

Certification
The functional operation and integrity of each BSC should be certified to national or
international performance standards at the time of installation and regularly thereafter
by qualified technicians, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Evaluation of
the effectiveness of cabinet containment should include tests for cabinet integrity, HEPA
filter leaks, downflow velocity profile, face velocity, negative pressure/ventilation rate,
air-flow smoke pattern, and alarms and interlocks. Optional tests for electrical leaks,
lighting intensity, ultraviolet light intensity, noise level and vibration may also be
conducted. Special training, skills and equipment are required to perform these tests
and it is highly recommended that they are undertaken by a qualified professional.

Cleaning and disinfection
All items within BSCs, including equipment, should be surface-decontaminated and
removed from the cabinet when work is completed, since residual culture media may
provide an opportunity for microbial growth.
   The interior surfaces of BSCs should be decontaminated before and after each use.
The work surfaces and interior walls should be wiped with a disinfectant that will kill
any microorganisms that might be found inside the cabinet. At the end of the work
day, the final surface decontamination should include a wipe-down of the work surface,
the sides, back and interior of the glass. A solution of bleach or 70% alcohol should be
used where effective for target organisms. A second wiping with sterile water is needed
when a corrosive disinfectant, such as bleach, is used.
   It is recommended that the cabinet is left running. If not, it should be run for 5 min
in order to purge the atmosphere inside before it is switched off.

Decontamination
BSCs must be decontaminated before filter changes and before being moved. The most
common decontamination method is by fumigation with formaldehyde gas. BSC
decontamination should be performed by a qualified professional.


                                           • 59 •
                              LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Personal protective equipment
Personal protective clothing should be worn whenever using a BSC. Laboratory coats
are acceptable for work being performed at Biosafety Levels 1 and 2. A solid front,
back-closing laboratory gown provides better protection and should be used at
Biosafety Levels 3 and 4 (except for suit laboratories). Gloves should be pulled over
the wrists of the gown rather than worn inside. Elasticized sleeves can be worn to
protect the investigator’s wrists. Masks and safety glasses may be required for some
procedures.

Alarms
BSCs can be equipped with one of two kinds of alarm. Sash alarms are found only on
cabinets with sliding sashes. The alarm signifies that the operator has moved the sash
to an improper position. Corrective action for this type of alarm is returning the sash
to the proper position. Airflow alarms indicate a disruption in the cabinet’s normal
airflow pattern. This represents an immediate danger to the operator or product. When
an airflow alarm sounds, work should cease immediately and the laboratory supervisor
should be notified. Manufacturers’ instruction manuals should provide further details.
Training in the use of BSCs should cover this aspect.

Supplementary information
Selecting the correct type of BSC, installing it, using it properly and annually certifying
its operation are complex processes. It is highly recommended that they proceed under
the supervision of a well-trained and experienced biosafety professional. The
professional should be highly familiar with the relevant literature listed in the References
section, and should have been trained on all aspects of BSCs. Operators should receive
formal training in the operation and use of BSCs.
For further information see references (5) and (7–16), and Chapter 11.




                                           • 60 •
11. Safety equipment



As aerosols are important sources of infection, care should be taken to reduce the
extent of their formation and dispersion. Hazardous aerosols can be generated by
many laboratory operations, e.g. blending, mixing, grinding, shaking, stirring,
sonicating and centrifuging of infectious materials. Even when safe equipment is used,
it is best to carry out these operations in an approved biological safety cabinet whenever
possible. Biological safety cabinets and their use and testing are discussed in Chapter 10.
The use of safety equipment is no assurance of protection unless the operator is trained
and uses proper techniques. Equipment should be tested regularly to ensure its
continued safe performance.
    Table 10 provides a checklist of safety equipment designed to eliminate or reduce
certain hazards and briefly outlines the safety features. Further details of much of this
equipment are given in subsequent pages. Additional information on its proper use is
provided in Chapter 12.
    Information on equipment and operations that may create hazards is presented in
Annex 4.

Negative-pressure flexible-film isolators
The negative-pressure flexible-film isolator is a self-contained primary containment
device that provides maximum protection against hazardous biological materials. It
may be mounted on a mobile stand. The workspace is totally enclosed in a transparent
polyvinylchloride (PVC) envelope suspended from a steel framework. The isolator is
maintained at an internal pressure lower than atmospheric pressure. Inlet air is passed
through one HEPA filter and outlet air is passed through two HEPA filters, thus
obviating the need to duct exhaust air outside the building. The isolator may be fitted
with an incubator, microscope and other laboratory equipment, such as centrifuges,
animal cages, heat blocks, etc. Material is introduced and removed from the isolator
through supply and sample ports without compromising microbiological security.
Manipulations are performed using gloved sleeves incorporating disposable gloves. A
manometer is installed to monitor envelope pressure.
   Flexible-film isolators are used to manipulate high-risk organisms (Risk Groups 3
or 4) in field work where it is not feasible or appropriate to install or maintain
conventional biological safety cabinets.



                                           • 61 •
                                 LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Table 10. Biosafety equipment
EQUIPMENT                HAZARD CORRECTED                 SAFETY FEATURES

Biological safety
cabinet
   — Class I             Aerosol and spatter              • Minimum inward airflow (face
                                                            velocity) at work access opening.
                                                            Adequate filtration of exhaust air.
                                                          • Does not provide product protection
   — Class II            Aerosol and spatter              • Minimum inward airflow (face
                                                            velocity) at work access opening.
                                                            Adequate filtration of exhaust air
                                                          • Provides product protection
   — Class III           Aerosol and spatter              • Maximum containment
                                                          • Provides product protection if
                                                            laminar flow air is included

Negative pressure        Aerosol and spatter              • Maximum containment
flexible-film isolator

Spatter shield           Spatter of chemicals             • Forms screen between operator and
                                                            work

Pipetting aids           Hazards from pipetting by        • Ease of use
                         mouth, e.g. ingestion of         • Controls contamination of suction
                         pathogens, inhalation of           end of pipette, protecting pipetting
                         aerosols produced by mouth         aid, user and vacuum line
                         suction on pipette, blowing      • Can be sterilized
                         out of liquid or dripping from   • Controls leakage from pipette tip
                         pipette, contamination of
                         suction end of pipette

Loop microinciner-       Spatter from transfer loops      • Shielded in open-ended glass or
ators, disposable                                           ceramic tube. Heated by gas or
loops                                                       electricity
                                                          • Disposable, no heating necessary

Leakproof vessels        Aerosols, spillage and           • Leakproof construction with lid or
for collection and       leakage                            cover
transport of                                              • Durable
infectious materials                                      • Autoclavable
for sterilization
within a facility

Sharps disposal          Puncture wounds                  • Autoclavable
containers                                                • Robust, puncture-proof

Transport containers Release of microorganisms            • Robust
between laboratories,                                     • Watertight primary and secondary
institutions                                                containers to contain spills
                                                          • Absorbent material to contain spills



                                                • 62 •
                                  11. SAFETY EQUIPMENT




EQUIPMENT             HAZARD CORRECTED               SAFETY FEATURES

Autoclaves, manual    Infectious material (made      • Approved design
or automatic          safe for disposal or reuse)    • Effective heat sterilization

Screw-capped bottles Aerosols and spillage           • Effective containment

Vacuum line           Contamination of laboratory    • Cartridge-type filter prevents
protection            vacuum system with               passage of aerosols (particle size
                      aerosols and overflow fluids     0.45 µm)
                                                     • Overflow flask contains appropriate
                                                       disinfectant. Rubber bulb may be
                                                       used to close off vacuum auto
                                                       matically when storage flask is full
                                                     • Entire unit autoclavable


Pipetting aids
A pipetting aid must always be used for pipetting procedures. Mouth pipetting must
be strictly forbidden.
    The importance of pipetting aids cannot be overemphasized. The most common
hazards associated with pipetting procedures are the result of mouth suction. Oral
aspiration and ingestion of hazardous materials have been responsible for many
laboratory-associated infections.
    Pathogens can also be transferred to the mouth if a contaminated finger is placed
on the suction end of a pipette. A lesser known hazard of mouth pipetting is the
inhalation of aerosols caused by suction. The cotton plug is not an efficient microbial
filter at negative or positive pressure, and particles may be sucked through it. Violent
suction may be applied when the plug is tightly packed, resulting in the aspiration of
plug, aerosol and even liquid. The ingestion of pathogens is prevented by the use of
pipetting aids.
    Aerosols can also be generated when a liquid is dropped from a pipette on to a
work surface, when cultures are mixed by alternate sucking and blowing, and when
the last drop is blown out of a pipette. The inhalation of aerosols unavoidably generated
during pipetting operations can be prevented by working in a biological safety cabinet.
    Pipetting aids should be selected with care. Their design and use should not create
an additional infectious hazard and they should be easy to sterilize and clean. Plugged
(aerosol-resistant) pipette tips should be used when manipulating microorganisms
and cell cultures.
    Pipettes with cracked or chipped suction ends should not be used as they damage
the seating seals of pipetting aids and so create a hazard.

Homogenizers, shakers, blenders and sonicators
Domestic (kitchen) homogenizers are not sealed and release aerosols. Only equipment
designed for laboratory use should be used. Their construction minimizes or prevents


                                           • 63 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



such release. Stomachers, which are now available for use with large and small volumes,
may also produce aerosols.
   Homogenizers used for Risk Group 3 microorganisms should always be loaded
and reopened in biological safety cabinets.
   Sonicators may release aerosols. They should be operated in biological safety cabinets
or covered with shields during use. The shields and outsides of sonicators should be
decontaminated after use.

Disposable transfer loops
The advantage of disposable transfer loops is that they do not have to be sterilized and
can therefore be used in biological safety cabinets where Bunsen burners and
microincinerators would disturb the airflow. These loops should be placed in
disinfectant after use and discarded as contaminated waste (see Chapter 3).

Microincinerators
Gas- and electrically-heated microincinerators have borosilicate glass or ceramic shields
that minimize the spatter and dispersal of infected material when transfer loops are
sterilized. However, microincinerators can disturb the airflow and should therefore be
placed towards the back of the work surface in biological safety cabinets.

Personal protective equipment and clothing
Personal protective equipment and clothing may act as a barrier to minimize the risk
of exposure to aerosols, splashes and accidental inoculation. The clothing and
equipment selected is dependent on the nature of the work performed. Protective
clothing should be worn when working in the laboratory. Before leaving the laboratory,
protective clothing should be removed, and hands should be washed. Table 11
summarizes some personal protective equipment used in laboratories and the
protection afforded.

Laboratory coats, gowns, coveralls, aprons
Laboratory coats should preferably be fully buttoned. However, long-sleeved, back-
opening gowns or coveralls give better protection than laboratory coats and are
preferred in microbiology laboratories and when working at the biological safety
cabinet. Aprons may be worn over laboratory coats or gowns where necessary to give
further protection against spillage of chemicals or biological materials such as blood
or culture fluids. Laundering services should be provided at/near the facility.
   Laboratory coats, gowns, coveralls, or aprons should not be worn outside the
laboratory areas.

Goggles, safety spectacles, face shields
The choice of equipment to protect the eyes and face from splashes and impacting
objects will depend on the activity performed. Prescription or plain eye glasses can be


                                          • 64 •
                                  11. SAFETY EQUIPMENT



Table 11. Personal protective equipment
EQUIPMENT         HAZARD CORRECTED            SAFETY FEATURES

Laboratory coats, Contamination of clothing • Back opening
gowns, coveralls                            • Cover street clothing

Plastic aprons    Contamination of clothing • Waterproof

Footwear          Impact and splash           • Closed-toe

Goggles           Impact and splash           • Impact-resistant lenses (must be optically
                                                correct or worn over corrective eye glasses)
                                              • Side shields

Safety spectacles Impact                      • Impact-resistant lenses (must be optically
                                                correct)
                                              • Side shields

Face shields      Impact and splash           • Shield entire face
                                              • Easily removable in case of accident

Respirators       Inhalation of aerosols      • Designs available include single-use
                                                disposable; full-face or half-face air
                                                purifying; full-face or hooded powered air
                                                purifying (PAPR); and supplied air
                                                respirators

Gloves            Direct contact with         • Disposable microbiologically approved latex,
                  microorganisms                vinyl or nitrile
                                              • Hand protection
                  Cuts                        • Mesh


manufactured with special frames that allow lenses to be placed in frame from the
front, using shatterproof material either curved or fitted with side shields (safety
glasses). Safety spectacles do not provide for adequate splash protection even when
side shields are worn with them. Goggles for splash and impact protection should be
worn over normal prescription eye glasses and contact lenses (which do not provide
protection against biological or chemical hazards). Face shields (visors) are made of
shatterproof plastic, fit over the face and are held in place by head straps or caps.
   Goggles, safety spectacles, or face shields should not be worn outside the laboratory
areas.

Respirators
Respiratory protection may be used when carrying out high-hazard procedures (e.g.
cleaning up a spill of infectious material). The choice of respirator will depend on the
type of hazard(s). Respirators are available with interchangeable filters for protection
against gases, vapours, particulates and microorganisms. It is imperative that the filter
is fitted in the correct type of respirator. To achieve optimal protection, respirators


                                           • 65 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



should be individually fitted to the operator’s face and tested. Fully self-contained
respirators with an integral air supply provide full protection. Advice should be sought
from a suitably qualified person, e.g. an occupational hygienist, for selection of the
correct respirator. Surgical type masks are designed solely for patient protection and
do not provide respiratory protection to workers. Some single-use disposable
respirators (ISO 13.340.30) have been designed for protection against exposures to
biological agents.
   Respirators should not be worn outside the laboratory areas.

Gloves
Contamination of hands may occur when laboratory procedures are performed. Hands
are also vulnerable to “sharps” injuries. Disposable microbiologically approved latex,
vinyl or nitrile surgical-type gloves are used widely for general laboratory work, and
for handling infectious agents and blood and body fluids. Reusable gloves may also be
used but attention must be given to their correct washing, removal, cleaning and
disinfection.
    Gloves should be removed and hands thoroughly washed after handling infectious
materials, working in a biological safety cabinet and before leaving the laboratory.
Used disposable gloves should be discarded with infected laboratory wastes.
    Allergic reactions such as dermatitis and immediate hypersensitivity have been
reported in laboratory and other workers wearing latex gloves, particularly those with
powder. Alternatives to powdered latex gloves should be available.
    Stainless steel mesh gloves should be worn when there is a potential exposure to
sharp instruments e.g. during postmortem examinations. Such gloves protect against
slicing motion but do not protect against puncture injury.
    Gloves should not be worn outside the laboratory areas.
For further information see references (12), (17) and (18).




                                         • 66 •
               PART IV
Good microbiological
         techniques
12. Laboratory techniques



Human error, poor laboratory techniques and misuse of equipment cause the majority
of laboratory injuries and work-related infections. This chapter provides a compendium
of technical methods that are designed to avoid or minimize the most commonly
reported problems of this nature.

Safe handling of specimens in the laboratory
Improper collection, transport and handling of specimens in the laboratory carry a
risk of infection to the personnel involved.

Specimen containers
Specimen containers may be of glass or preferably plastic. They should be robust and
should not leak when the cap or stopper is correctly applied. No material should remain
on the outside of the container. Containers should be correctly labelled to facilitate
identification. Specimen request or specification forms should not be wrapped around
the containers but placed in separate, preferably waterproof envelopes.

Transport of specimens within the facility
To avoid accidental leakage or spillage, secondary containers, such as boxes, should be
used, fitted with racks so that the specimen containers remain upright. The secondary
containers may be of metal or plastic, should be autoclavable or resistant to the action
of chemical disinfectants, and the seal should preferably have a gasket. They should be
regularly decontaminated.

Receipt of specimens
Laboratories that receive large numbers of specimens should designate a particular
room or area for this purpose.

Opening packages
Personnel who receive and unpack specimens should be aware of the potential health
hazards involved, and should be trained to adopt standard precautions (2), particularly
when dealing with broken or leaking containers. Primary specimen containers should
be opened in a biological safety cabinet. Disinfectants should be available.



                                         • 69 •
                              LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Use of pipettes and pipetting aids
 1. A pipetting aid must always be used. Pipetting by mouth must be prohibited.
 2. All pipettes should have cotton plugs to reduce contamination of pipetting devices.
 3. Air should never be blown through a liquid containing infectious agents.
 4. Infectious materials should not be mixed by alternate suction and expulsion through
    a pipette.
 5. Liquids should not be forcibly expelled from pipettes.
 6. Mark-to-mark pipettes are preferable to other types as they do not require expulsion
    of the last drop.
 7. Contaminated pipettes should be completely submerged in a suitable disinfectant
    contained in an unbreakable container. They should be left in the disinfectant for
    the appropriate length of time before disposal.
 8. A discard container for pipettes should be placed within the biological safety cabinet,
    not outside it.
 9. Syringes fitted with hypodermic needles must not be used for pipetting.
10. Devices for opening septum-capped bottles that allow pipettes to be used and avoid
    the use of hypodermic needles and syringes should be used.
11. To avoid dispersion of infectious material dropped from a pipette, an absorbent
    material should be placed on the working surface; this should be disposed of as
    infectious waste after use.

Avoiding the dispersal of infectious materials
 1. In order to avoid the premature shedding of their loads, microbiological transfer
    loops should have a diameter of 2–3 mm and be completely closed. The shanks
    should be not more than 6 cm in length to minimize vibration.
 2. The risk of spatter of infectious material in an open Bunsen burner flame should
    be avoided by using an enclosed electric microincinerator to sterilize transfer loops.
    Disposable transfer loops, which do not need to be resterilized, are preferable.
 3. Care should be taken when drying sputum samples, to avoid creating aerosols.
 4. Discarded specimens and cultures for autoclaving and/or disposal should be placed
    in leakproof containers, e.g. laboratory discard bags. Tops should be secured (e.g.
    with autoclave tape) prior to disposal into waste containers.
 5. Working areas must be decontaminated with a suitable disinfectant at the end of
    each work period.
For further information see reference (12).

Use of biological safety cabinets
 1. The use and limitations of biological safety cabinets should be explained to all
    potential users (see Chapter 10), with reference to national standards and relevant
    literature. Written protocols or safety or operations manuals should be issued to
    staff. In particular, it must be made clear that the cabinet will not protect the
    operator from spillage, breakage or poor technique.

                                           • 70 •
                              12. LABORATORY TECHNIQUES



 2. The cabinet must not be used unless it is working properly.
 3. The glass viewing panel must not be opened when the cabinet is in use.
 4. Apparatus and materials in the cabinet must be kept to a minimum. Air circulation
    at the rear plenum must not be blocked.
 5. Bunsen burners must not be used in the cabinet. The heat produced will distort
    the airflow and may damage the filters. An electric microincinerator is permissible
    but sterile disposable transfer loops are better.
 6. All work must be carried out in the middle or rear part of the working surface and
    be visible through the viewing panel.
 7. Traffic behind the operator should be minimized.
 8. The operator should not disturb the airflow by repeated removal and reintroduction
    of his or her arms.
 9. Air grills must not be blocked with notes, pipettes or other materials, as this will
    disrupt the airflow causing potential contamination of the material and exposure
    of the operator.
10. The surface of the biological safety cabinet should be wiped using an appropriate
    disinfectant after work is completed and at the end of the day.
11. The cabinet fan should be run for at least 5 min before beginning work and after
    completion of work in the cabinet.
12. Paperwork should never be placed inside biological safety cabinets.
For further information about biological safety cabinets see Chapter 10.

Avoiding ingestion of infectious materials and contact with skin and eyes
 1. Large particles and droplets (> 5 µm in diameter) released during microbiological
    manipulations settle rapidly on bench surfaces and on the hands of the operator.
    Disposable gloves should be worn. Laboratory workers should avoid touching their
    mouth, eyes and face.
 2. Food and drink must not be consumed or stored in the laboratory.
 3. No articles should be placed in the mouth – pens, pencils, chewing gum – in the
    laboratory.
 4. Cosmetics should not be applied in the laboratory.
 5. The face, eyes and mouth should be shielded or otherwise protected during any
    operation that may result in the splashing of potentially infectious materials.

Avoiding injection of infectious materials
 1. Accidental inoculation resulting from injury with broken or chipped glassware
    can be avoided through careful practices and procedures. Glassware should be
    replaced with plastic ware whenever possible.
 2. Accidental injection may result from sharps injuries e.g. with hypodermic needles
    (needle-sticks), glass Pasteur pipettes, or broken glass.
 3. Needle-stick injuries can be reduced by: (a) minimizing the use of syringes and
    needles (e.g. simple devices are available for opening septum-stoppered bottles so

                                         • 71 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



   that pipettes can be used instead of syringes and needles; or (b) using engineered
   sharp safety devices when syringes and needles are necessary.
4. Needles should never be recapped. Disposable articles should be discarded into
   puncture-proof/puncture-resistant containers fitted with covers.
5. Plastic Pasteur pipettes should replace those made of glass.

Separation of serum
 1. Only properly trained staff should be employed for this work.
 2. Gloves and eye and mucous membrane protection should be worn.
 3. Splashes and aerosols can only be avoided or minimized by good laboratory
    technique. Blood and serum should be pipetted carefully, not poured. Pipetting by
    mouth must be forbidden.
 4. After use, pipettes should be completely submerged in suitable disinfectant. They
    should remain in the disinfectant for the appropriate time before disposal or
    washing and sterilization for reuse.
 5. Discarded specimen tubes containing blood clots, etc. (with caps replaced) should
    be placed in suitable leakproof containers for autoclaving and/or incineration.
 6. Suitable disinfectants should be available for clean-up of splashes and spillages
    (see Chapter 14).

Use of centrifuges
 1. Satisfactory mechanical performance is a prerequisite of microbiological safety in
    the use of laboratory centrifuges.
 2. Centrifuges should be operated according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
 3. Centrifuges should be placed at such a level that workers can see into the bowl to
    place trunnions and buckets correctly.
 4. Centrifuge tubes and specimen containers for use in the centrifuge should be made
    of thick-walled glass or preferably of plastic and should be inspected for defects
    before use.
 5. Tubes and specimen containers should always be securely capped (screw-capped
    if possible) for centrifugation.
 6. The buckets must be loaded, equilibrated, sealed and opened in a biological safety
    cabinet.
 7. Buckets and trunnions should be paired by weight and, with tubes in place, correctly
    balanced.
 8. The amount of space that should be left between the level of the fluid and the rim
    of the centrifuge tube should be given in manufacturer’s instructions.
 9. Distilled water or alcohol (propanol, 70%) should be used for balancing empty
    buckets. Saline or hypochlorite solutions should not be used as they corrode metals.
10. Sealable centrifuge buckets (safety cups) must be used for microorganisms in Risk
    Groups 3 and 4.
11. When using angle-head centrifuge rotors, care must be taken to ensure that the
    tube is not overloaded as it might leak.
                                         • 72 •
                                12. LABORATORY TECHNIQUES



12. The interior of the centrifuge bowl should be inspected daily for staining or soiling
    at the level of the rotor. If staining or soiling are evident then the centrifugation
    protocols should be re-evaluated.
13. Centrifuge rotors and buckets should be inspected daily for signs of corrosion and
    for hair-line cracks.
14. Buckets, rotors and centrifuge bowls should be decontaminated after each use.
15. After use, buckets should be stored in an inverted position to drain the balancing
    fluid.
16. Infectious airborne particles may be ejected when centrifuges are used. These
    particles travel at speeds too high to be retained by the cabinet airflow if the
    centrifuge is placed in a traditional open-fronted Class I or Class II biological safety
    cabinet. Enclosing centrifuges in Class III safety cabinets prevents emitted aerosols
    from dispersing widely. However, good centrifuge technique and securely capped
    tubes offer adequate protection against infectious aerosols and dispersed particles.

Use of homogenizers, shakers, blenders and sonicators
 1. Domestic (kitchen) homogenizers should not be used in laboratories as they may
    leak or release aerosols. Laboratory blenders and stomachers are safer.
 2. Caps and cups or bottles should be in good condition and free from flaws or
    distortion. Caps should be well-fitting and gaskets should be in good condition.
 3. Pressure builds up in the vessel during the operation of homogenizers, shakers
    and sonicators. Aerosols containing infectious materials may escape from between
    the cap and the vessel. Plastic, in particular, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) vessels
    are recommended because glass may break, releasing infectious material and
    possibly wounding the operator.
 4. When in use, homogenizers, shakers and sonicators should be covered by a strong
    transparent plastic casing. This should be disinfected after use. Where possible, these
    machines should be operated, under their plastic covers, in a biological safety cabinet.
 5. At the end of the operation the containers should be opened in a biological safety
    cabinet.
 6. Hearing protection should be provided for people using sonicators.

Use of tissue grinders
 1. Glass grinders should be held in absorbent material in a gloved hand. Plastic (PTFE)
    grinders are safer.
 2. Tissue grinders should be operated and opened in a biological safety cabinet.

Care and use of refrigerators and freezers
 1. Refrigerators, deep-freezers and solid carbon dioxide (dry-ice) chests should be
    defrosted and cleaned periodically, and any ampoules, tubes, etc. that have broken
    during storage removed. Face protection and heavy duty rubber gloves should be
    worn during cleaning. After cleaning, the inner surfaces of the cabinet should be
    disinfected.
                                           • 73 •
                              LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



2. All containers stored in refrigerators, etc. should be clearly labelled with the scientific
   name of the contents, the date stored and the name of the individual who stored
   them. Unlabelled and obsolete materials should be autoclaved and discarded.
3. An inventory must be maintained of the freezer’s contents.
4. Flammable solutions must not be stored in a refrigerator unless it is explosion-
   proof. Notices to this effect should be placed on refrigerator doors.

Opening of ampoules containing lyophilized infectious materials
Care should be taken when ampoules of freeze-dried materials are opened, as the
contents may be under reduced pressure and the sudden inrush of air may disperse
some of the materials into the atmosphere. Ampoules should always be opened in a
biological safety cabinet. The following procedures are recommended for opening
ampoules.
1. First decontaminate the outer surface of the ampoule.
2. Make a file mark on the tube near to the middle of the cotton or cellulose plug, if
   present.
3. Hold the ampoule in alcohol-soaked cotton to protect hands before breaking it at
   a file scratch.
4. Remove the top gently and treat as contaminated material.
5. If the plug is still above the contents of the ampoule, remove it with sterile forceps.
6. Add liquid for resuspension slowly to the ampoule to avoid frothing.

Storage of ampoules containing infectious materials
Ampoules containing infectious materials should never be immersed in liquid nitrogen
because cracked or imperfectly sealed ampoules may break or explode on removal. If
very low temperatures are required, ampoules should be stored only in the gaseous
phase above the liquid nitrogen. Otherwise, infectious materials should be stored in
mechanical deep-freeze cabinets or on dry ice. Laboratory workers should wear eye
and hand protection when removing ampoules from cold storage.
   The outer surfaces of ampoules stored in these ways should be disinfected when
the ampoules are removed from storage.

Standard precautions with blood and other body fluids, tissues and excreta
Standard precautions (which include “universal precautions” (19)) are designed to
reduce the risk of transmission of microorganisms from both recognized and
unrecognized sources of infection (2).

Collection, labelling and transport of specimens
 1. Standard precautions (2) should always be followed; gloves should be worn for all
    procedures.
 2. Blood should be collected from patients and animals by trained staff.
 3. For phlebotomies, conventional needle and syringe systems should be replaced by

                                           • 74 •
                               12. LABORATORY TECHNIQUES



   single-use safety vacuum devices that allow the collection of blood directly into
   stoppered transport and/or culture tubes, automatically disabling the needle after
   use.
4. The tubes should be placed in adequate containers for transport to the laboratory
   (see Chapter 15 for transport requirements) and within the laboratory facility (see
   section on Transport of specimens within the facility in this chapter). Request forms
   should be placed in separate waterproof bags or envelopes.
5. Reception staff should not open these bags.

Opening specimen tubes and sampling contents
 1. Specimen tubes should be opened in a biological safety cabinet.
 2. Gloves must be worn. Eye and mucous membrane protection is also recommended
    (goggles or face shields).
 3. Protective clothing should be supplemented with a plastic apron.
 4. The stopper should be grasped through a piece of paper or gauze to prevent
    splashing.

Glass and “sharps”
 1. Plastics should replace glass wherever possible. Only laboratory grade (borosilicate)
    glass should be used, and any article that is chipped or cracked should be discarded.
 2. Hypodermic needles must not be used as pipettes (see also section on Avoiding
    injection of infectious materials in this chapter).

Films and smears for microscopy
Fixing and staining of blood, sputum and faecal samples for microscopy do not
necessarily kill all organisms or viruses on the smears. These items should be handled
with forceps, stored appropriately, and decontaminated and/or autoclaved before
disposal.

Automated equipment (sonicators, vortex mixers)
 1. Equipment should be of the closed type to avoid dispersion of droplets and aerosols.
 2. Effluents should be collected in closed vessels for further autoclaving and/or
    disposal.
 3. Equipment should be disinfected at the end of each session, following manu-
    facturers’ instructions.

Tissues
 1. Formalin fixatives should be used.
 2. Frozen sectioning should be avoided. When necessary, the cryostat should be
    shielded and the operator should wear a safety face shield. For decontamination,
    the temperature of the instrument should be raised to at least 20 °C.



                                          • 75 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Decontamination
Hypochlorites and high-level disinfectants are recommended for decontamination.
Freshly prepared hypochlorite solutions should contain available chlorine at 1 g/l for
general use and 5 g/l for blood spillages. Glutaraldehyde may be used for decontami-
nating surfaces (see Chapter 14).

Precautions with materials that may contain prions
Prions (also referred to as “slow viruses”) are associated with the transmissible spongi-
form encephalopathies (TSEs), notably Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD; including the
new variant form), Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker syndrome, fatal familial insomnia
and kuru in humans; scrapie in sheep and goats; bovine spongiform encephalopathy
(BSE) in cattle; and other transmissible encephalopathies of deer, elk and mink.
Although CJD has been transmitted to humans, there appear to be no proven cases of
laboratory-associated infections with any of these agents. Nevertheless, it is prudent
to observe certain precautions in the handling of material from infected or potentially
infected humans and animals.
    The selection of a biosafety level for work with materials associated with TSEs will
depend on the nature of the agent and the samples to be studied, and should be
undertaken in consultation with national authorities. The highest concentrations of
prions are found in central nervous system tissue. Animal studies suggest that it is
likely that high concentrations of prions are also found in the spleen, thymus, lymph
nodes and lung. Recent studies indicate that prions in lingual and skeletal muscle
tissue may also present a potential infection risk (20–23).
    As complete inactivation of prions is difficult to achieve, it is important to stress
the use of disposable instruments whenever possible, and to use a disposable protective
covering for the work surface of the biological safety cabinet.
    The main precaution to be taken is to avoid ingestion of contaminated materials or
puncture of the laboratory worker’s skin. The following additional precautions should
be taken, as the agents are not killed by the normal processes of laboratory disinfection
and sterilization.
1. The use of dedicated equipment, i.e. equipment not shared with other laboratories,
   is highly recommended.
2. Disposable laboratory protective clothing (gowns and aprons) and gloves must be
   worn (steel mesh gloves between rubber gloves for pathologists).
3. Use of disposable plastic ware, which can be treated and discarded as dry waste, is
   highly recommended.
4. Tissue processors should not be used because of the problems of disinfection. Jars
   and beakers (plastic) should be used instead.
5. All manipulations must be conducted in biological safety cabinets.
6. Great care should be exercised to avoid aerosol production, ingestion, and cuts
   and punctures of the skin.


                                          • 76 •
                               12. LABORATORY TECHNIQUES



 7. Formalin-fixed tissues should be regarded as still infectious, even after prolonged
    exposure to formalin.
 8. Histological samples containing prions are substantially inactivated after exposure
    to 96% formic acid for 1 h (24), (25).
 9. Bench waste, including disposable gloves, gowns and aprons, should be autoclaved
    using a porous load steam sterilizer at 134–137 °C for a single cycle of 18 min, or
    six successive cycles of 3 min each, followed by incineration.
10. Non-disposable instruments, including steel mesh gloves, must be collected for
    decontamination.
11. Infectious liquid waste contaminated with prions should be treated with sodium
    hypochlorite containing available chlorine at 20 g/l (2%) (final concentration) for
    1 h.
12. Paraformaldehyde vaporization procedures do not diminish prion titres and prions
    are resistant to ultraviolet irradiation. However, the cabinets must continue to be
    decontaminated by standard methods (i.e. formaldehyde gas) to inactivate other
    agents that may be present.
13. Prion-contaminated biological safety cabinets and other surfaces can be
    decontaminated with sodium hypochlorite containing available chlorine at 20 g/l
    (2%) for 1 h.
14. High-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters should be incinerated at a minimum
    temperature of 1000 °C after removal. Recommended additional steps prior to
    incineration include:
    a. spraying of the exposed face of the filter with lacquer hairspray prior to removal,
    b. “bagging” of filters during removal, and
    c. removal of the HEPA filter from the working chamber so that the inaccessible
        plenum of the cabinet is not contaminated.
15. Instruments should be soaked in sodium hypochlorite containing available chlorine
    at 20 g/l (2%) for 1 h and then rinsed well in water before autoclaving.
16. Instruments that cannot be autoclaved can be cleaned by repeated wetting with
    sodium hypochlorite containing available chlorine at 20 g/l (2%) over a 1-h period.
    Appropriate washing to remove residual sodium hypochlorite is required.
For further information on the handling of unconventional agents see references (12),
(26) and (27).




                                          • 77 •
13. Contingency plans and
    emergency procedures


Every laboratory that works with infective microorganisms should institute safety
precautions appropriate to the hazard of the organisms and the animals being handled.
    A written contingency plan for dealing with laboratory and animal facility accidents
is a necessity in any facility that works with or stores Risk Group 3 or 4 microorganisms
(containment laboratory – Biosafety Level 3 and maximum containment laboratory –
Biosafety Level 4). National and/or local health authorities should be involved in the
development of the emergency preparedness plan.

Contingency plan
The contingency plan should provide operational procedures for:
1. Precautions against natural disasters, e.g. fire, flood, earthquake and explosion
2. Biohazard risk assessment
3. Incident-exposure management and decontamination
4. Emergency evacuation of people and animals from the premises
5. Emergency medical treatment of exposed and injured persons
6. Medical surveillance of exposed persons
7. Clinical management of exposed persons
8. Epidemiological investigation
9. Post-incident continuation of operations.
In the development of this plan the following items should be considered for inclusion:
1. Identification of high-risk organisms
2. Location of high-risk areas, e.g. laboratories, storage areas, animal facilities
3. Identification of at-risk personnel and populations
4. Identification of responsible personnel and their duties, e.g. biosafety officer, safety
   personnel, local health authority, clinicians, microbiologists, veterinarians,
   epidemiologists, and fire and police services
5. Lists of treatment and isolation facilities that can receive exposed or infected persons
6. Transport of exposed or infected persons
7. Lists of sources of immune serum, vaccines, drugs, special equipment and supplies
8. Provision of emergency equipment, e.g. protective clothing, disinfectants, chemical
   and biological spill kits, decontamination equipment and supplies.



                                          • 78 •
                   13. CONTINGENCY PLANS AND EMERGENCY PROCEDURES



Emergency procedures for microbiological laboratories
Puncture wounds, cuts and abrasions
The affected individual should remove protective clothing, wash the hands and any
affected area(s), apply an appropriate skin disinfectant, and seek medical attention as
necessary. The cause of the wound and the organisms involved should be reported,
and appropriate and complete medical records kept.

Ingestion of potentially infectious material
Protective clothing should be removed and medical attention sought. Identification
of the material ingested and circumstances of the incident should be reported, and
appropriate and complete medical records kept.

Potentially infectious aerosol release (outside a biological safety cabinet)
All persons should immediately vacate the affected area and any exposed persons should
be referred for medical advice. The laboratory supervisor and the biosafety officer
should be informed at once. No one should enter the room for an appropriate amount
of time (e.g. 1 h), to allow aerosols to be carried away and heavier particles to settle. If
the laboratory does not have a central air exhaust system, entrance should be delayed
(e.g. for 24 h).
   Signs should be posted indicating that entry is forbidden. After the appropriate
time, decontamination should proceed, supervised by the biosafety officer. Appropriate
protective clothing and respiratory protection should be worn.

Broken containers and spilled infectious substances
Broken containers contaminated with infectious substances and spilled infectious
substances should be covered with a cloth or paper towels. Disinfectant should then
be poured over these and left for the appropriate amount of time. The cloth or paper
towels and the broken material can then be cleared away; glass fragments should be
handled with forceps. The contaminated area should then be swabbed with disinfectant.
If dustpans are used to clear away the broken material, they should be autoclaved or
placed in an effective disinfectant. Cloths, paper towels and swabs used for cleaning
up should be placed in a contaminated-waste container. Gloves should be worn for all
these procedures.
   If laboratory forms or other printed or written matter are contaminated, the
information should be copied onto another form and the original discarded into the
contaminated-waste container.

Breakage of tubes containing potentially infectious material in centrifuges
not having sealable buckets
If a breakage occurs or is suspected while the machine is running, the motor should be
switched off and the machine left closed (e.g. for 30 min) to allow settling. If a breakage
is discovered after the machine has stopped, the lid should be replaced immediately


                                           • 79 •
                              LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



and left closed (e.g. for 30 min). In both instances, the biosafety officer should be
informed.
   Strong (e.g. thick rubber) gloves, covered if necessary with suitable disposable gloves,
should be worn for all subsequent operations. Forceps, or cotton held in the forceps,
should be used to retrieve glass debris.
   All broken tubes, glass fragments, buckets, trunnions and the rotor should be placed
in a noncorrosive disinfectant known to be active against the organisms concerned
(see Chapter 14). Unbroken, capped tubes may be placed in disinfectant in a separate
container and recovered.
   The centrifuge bowl should be swabbed with the same disinfectant, at the appropriate
dilution, and then swabbed again, washed with water and dried. All materials used in
the clean-up should be treated as infectious waste.

Breakage of tubes inside sealable buckets (safety cups)
All sealed centrifuge buckets should be loaded and unloaded in a biological safety
cabinet. If breakage is suspected within the safety cup, the safety cap should be loosened
and the bucket autoclaved. Alternatively, the safety cup may be chemically disinfected.

Fire and natural disasters
Fire and other services should be involved in the development of emergency
preparedness plans. They should be told in advance which rooms contain potentially
infectious materials. It is beneficial to arrange for these services to visit the laboratory
to become acquainted with its layout and contents.
   After a natural disaster, local or national emergency services should be warned of
the potential hazards within and/or near laboratory buildings. They should enter only
when accompanied by a trained laboratory worker. Infectious materials should be
collected in leakproof boxes or strong disposable bags.
   Salvage or final disposal should be determined by biosafety staff on the basis of
local ordinances.

Emergency services: whom to contact
The telephone numbers and addresses of the following should be prominently displayed
in the facility:
 1. The institution or laboratory itself (the address and location may not be known in
    detail by the caller or the services called)
 2. Director of the institution or laboratory
 3. Laboratory supervisor
 4. Biosafety officer
 5. Fire services
 6. Hospitals/ambulance services/medical staff (names of individual clinics,
    departments, and/or medical staff, if possible)


                                           • 80 •
                   13. CONTINGENCY PLANS AND EMERGENCY PROCEDURES



 7. Police
 8. Medical officer
 9. Responsible technician
10. Water, gas and electricity services.

Emergency equipment
The following emergency equipment must be available:
1. First-aid kit, including universal and special antidotes
2. Appropriate fire extinguishers, fire blankets
The following are also suggested but may be varied according to local circumstances:
1. Full protective clothing (one-piece coveralls, gloves and head covering – for
   incidents involving microorganisms in Risk Groups 3 and 4)
2. Full-face respirators with appropriate chemical and particulate filter canisters
3. Room disinfection apparatus, e.g. sprays and formaldehyde vaporizers
4. Stretcher
5. Tools, e.g. hammers, axes, spanners, screwdrivers, ladders, ropes
6. Hazard area demarcation equipment and notices.
For further information see references (12) and (28).




                                           • 81 •
14. Disinfection and sterilization



A basic knowledge of disinfection and sterilization is crucial for biosafety in the
laboratory. Since heavily soiled items cannot promptly be disinfected or sterilized, it is
equally important to understand the fundamentals of cleaning prior to disinfection
(precleaning). In this regard, the following general principles apply to all known classes
of microbial pathogens.
   Specific decontamination requirements will depend on the type of experimental
work and the nature of the infectious agent(s) being handled. The generic information
given here can be used to develop both standardized and more specific procedures to
deal with biohazard(s) involved in a particular laboratory.
   Contact times for disinfectants are specific for each material and manufacturer.
Therefore, all recommendations for use of disinfectants should follow manufacturers’
specifications.

Definitions
Many different terms are used for disinfection and sterilization. The following are
among the more common in biosafety:
Antimicrobial – An agent that kills microorganisms or suppresses their growth and
  multiplication.
Antiseptic – A substance that inhibits the growth and development of microorganisms
  without necessarily killing them. Antiseptics are usually applied to body surfaces.
Biocide – A general term for any agent that kills organisms.
Chemical germicide – A chemical or a mixture of chemicals used to kill micro-
  organisms.
Decontamination – Any process for removing and/or killing microorganisms. The
  same term is also used for removing or neutralizing hazardous chemicals and radio-
  active materials.
Disinfectant – A chemical or mixture of chemicals used to kill microorganisms, but
  not necessarily spores. Disinfectants are usually applied to inanimate surfaces or
  objects.
Disinfection – A physical or chemical means of killing microorganisms, but not
  necessarily spores.
Microbicide – A chemical or mixture of chemicals that kills microorganisms. The
  term is often used in place of “biocide”, “chemical germicide” or “antimicrobial”.

                                          • 82 •
                           14. DISINFECTION AND STERILIZATION



Sporocide – A chemical or mixture of chemicals used to kill microorganisms and
   spores.
Sterilization – A process that kills and/or removes all classes of microorganisms and
   spores.

Cleaning laboratory materials
Cleaning is the removal of dirt, organic matter and stains. Cleaning includes brushing,
vacuuming, dry dusting, washing or damp mopping with water containing a soap or
detergent. Dirt, soil and organic matter can shield microorganisms and can interfere
with the killing action of decontaminants (antiseptics, chemical germicides and
disinfectants).
   Precleaning is essential to achieve proper disinfection or sterilization. Many germi-
cidal products claim activity only on precleaned items. Precleaning must be carried
out with care to avoid exposure to infectious agents.
   Materials chemically compatible with the germicides to be applied later must be
used. It is quite common to use the same chemical germicide for precleaning and
disinfection.

Chemical germicides
Many types of chemicals can be used as disinfectants and/or antiseptics. As there is an
ever-increasing number and variety of commercial products, formulations must be
carefully selected for specific needs.
   The germicidal activity of many chemicals is faster and better at higher temperatures.
At the same time, higher temperatures can accelerate their evaporation and also degrade
them. Particular care is needed in the use and storage of such chemicals in tropical
regions, where their shelf-life may be reduced because of high ambient temperatures.
   Many germicides can be harmful to humans or the environment. They should be
selected, stored, handled, used and disposed of with care, following manufacturers’
instructions. For personal safety, gloves, aprons and eye protection are recommended
when preparing dilutions of chemical germicides.
   Chemical germicides are generally not required for regular cleaning of floors, walls,
equipment and furniture. However, their use may be appropriate in certain cases of
outbreak control.
   Proper use of chemical germicides will contribute to workplace safety while reducing
the risk from infectious agents. As far as possible, the number of germicidal chemicals
to be used should be limited for economic reasons, inventory control and to limit
environmental pollution.
   Commonly used classes of chemical germicides are described below, with generic
information on their applications and safety profiles. Unless otherwise indicated, the
germicide concentrations are given in weight/volume (w/v). Table 12 summarizes the
recommended dilutions of chlorine-releasing compounds.



                                          • 83 •
                                   LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Table 12. Recommended dilutions of chlorine-releasing compounds
                                                            “CLEAN” CONDITIONSa   “DIRTY” CONDITIONSb

Available chlorine required                                     0.1% (1 g/l)         0.5% (5 g/l)
Sodium hypochlorite solution (5% available chlorine)                20 ml/l            100 ml/l
Calcium hypochlorite (70% available chlorine)                       1.4 g/l             7.0 g/l
Sodium dichloroisocyanurate powder                                  1.7 g/l             8.5 g/l
(60% available chlorine)
Sodium dichloroisocyanurate tablets                                 1 tablet           4 tablets
(1.5 g available chlorine per tablet)                               per litre           per litre
Chloramine (25% available chlorine)c                                 20 g/l             20 g/l
a
  After removal of bulk material.
b
  For flooding, e.g. on blood or before removal of bulk material.
c
  See text.



Chlorine (sodium hypochlorite)
Chlorine, a fast-acting oxidant, is a widely available and broad-spectrum chemical
germicide. It is normally sold as bleach, an aqueous solution of sodium hypochlorite
(NaOCl), which can be diluted with water to provide various concentrations of available
chlorine.
   Chlorine, especially as bleach, is highly alkaline and can be corrosive to metal. Its
activity is considerably reduced by organic matter (protein). Storage of stock or working
solutions of bleach in open containers, particularly at high temperatures, releases
chlorine gas thus weakening their germicidal potential. The frequency with which
working solutions of bleach should be changed depends on their starting strength, the
type (e.g. with or without a lid) and size of their containers, the frequency and nature
of use, and ambient conditions. As a general guide, solutions receiving materials with
high levels of organic matter several times a day should be changed at least daily, while
those with less frequent use may last for as long as a week.
   A general all-purpose laboratory disinfectant should have a concentration of 1 g/l
available chlorine. A stronger solution, containing 5 g/l available chlorine, is recom-
mended for dealing with biohazardous spillage and in the presence of large amounts
of organic matter. Sodium hypochlorite solutions, as domestic bleach, contain 50 g/l
available chlorine and should therefore be diluted 1:50 or 1:10 to obtain final concen-
trations of 1 g/l and 5 g/l, respectively. Industrial solutions of bleach have a sodium
hypochlorite concentration of nearly 120 g/l and must be diluted accordingly to obtain
the levels indicated above.
   Granules or tablets of calcium hypochlorite (Ca(ClO)2) generally contain about
70% available chlorine. Solutions prepared with granules or tablets, containing 1.4 g/l and
7.0 g/l, will then contain 1.0 g/l and 5 g/l available chlorine, respectively.
   Bleach is not recommended as an antiseptic, but may be used as a general-purpose


                                                   • 84 •
                            14. DISINFECTION AND STERILIZATION



disinfectant and for soaking contaminated metal-free materials. In emergencies, bleach
can also be used to disinfect water for drinking, with a final concentration of 1–2 mg/l
available chlorine.
   Chlorine gas is highly toxic. Bleach must therefore be stored and used in well-
ventilated areas only. Also, bleach must not be mixed with acids to prevent the rapid
release of chlorine gas. Many by-products of chlorine can be harmful to humans and
the environment, so that indiscriminate use of chlorine-based disinfectants, in
particular bleach, should be avoided.

Sodium dichloroisocyanurate
Sodium dichloroisocyanurate (NaDCC) in powder form contains 60% available
chlorine. Solutions prepared with NaDCC powder at 1.7 g/l and 8.5 g/l will contain
1 g/l or 5 g/l available chlorine, respectively. Tablets of NaDCC generally contain the
equivalent of 1.5 g available chlorine per tablet. One or four tablets dissolved in 1 l of
water will give approximately the required concentrations of 1 g/l or 5 g/l, respectively.
NaDCC as powder or tablets is easy and safe to store. Solid NaDCC can be applied on
spills of blood or other biohazardous liquids and left for at least 10 min before removal.
Further cleaning of the affected area can then take place.

Chloramines
Chloramines are available as powders containing about 25% available chlorine.
Chloramines release chlorine at a slower rate than hypochlorites. Higher initial
concentrations are therefore required for efficiencies equivalent to those of
hypochlorites. On the other hand, chloramine solutions are not inactivated by organic
matter to the same extent as hypochlorite solutions, and concentrations of 20 g/l are
recommended for both “clean” and “dirty” situations.
   Chloramine solutions are virtually odour-free. However, items soaked in them must
be thoroughly rinsed to remove any residue of the bulking agents added to chloramine-
T (sodium tosylchloramide) powders.

Chlorine dioxide
Chlorine dioxide (ClO2) is a strong and fast-acting germicide, disinfectant agent and
oxidizer, often reported to be active at concentrations levels lower than those needed
by chlorine as bleach. Chlorine dioxide is unstable as a gas and will undergo
decomposition into chlorine gas (Cl2), oxygen gas (O2), giving off heat. However,
chlorine dioxide is soluble in water and stable in an aqueous solution. Chlorine dioxide
can be obtained in two ways: (1) on-site generation by mixing of two separate
components, hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium chlorite (NaClO2); and (2) ordering
its stabilized form, which is then activated on-site when required.
    Of the oxidizing biocides, chlorine dioxide is the most selective oxidant. Ozone and
chlorine are much more reactive than chlorine dioxide, and they will be consumed by
most organic compounds. Chlorine dioxide, however, reacts only with reduced sulfur


                                          • 85 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



compounds, secondary and tertiary amines, and some other highly reduced and reactive
organic compounds. A more stable residue can therefore be achieved with chlorine
dioxide at much lower doses than when using either chlorine or ozone. Generated
properly, chlorine dioxide can be used more effectively than ozone or chlorine in cases
of higher organic loading because of its selectivity.

Formaldehyde
Formaldehyde (HCHO) is a gas that kills all microorganisms and spores at temperatures
above 20 °C. However, it is not active against prions.
   Formaldehyde is relatively slow-acting and needs a relative humidity level of about
70%. It is marketed as the solid polymer, paraformaldehyde, in flakes or tablets, or as
formalin, a solution of the gas in water of about 370 g/l (37%), containing methanol
(100 ml/l) as a stabilizer. Both formulations are heated to liberate the gas, which is
used for decontamination and disinfection of enclosed volumes such as safety cabinets
and rooms (see section on Local environmental decontamination in this chapter).
Formaldehyde (5% formalin in water) may be used as a liquid disinfectant.
   Formaldehyde is a suspected carcinogen. It is a dangerous, irritant gas that has a
pungent smell and its fumes can irritate eyes and mucous membranes. It must therefore
be stored and used in a fume-hood or well-ventilated area. National chemical safety
regulations must be followed.

Glutaraldehyde
Like formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde (OHC(CH2)3CHO) is also active against vegetative
bacteria, spores, fungi and lipid- and nonlipid-containing viruses. It is non-corrosive
and faster acting than formaldehyde. However, it takes several hours to kill bacterial
spores.
    Glutaraldehyde is generally supplied as a solution with a concentration of about
20 g/l (2%) and some products may need to be “activated” (made alkaline) before use
by the addition of a bicarbonate compound supplied with the product. The activated
solution can be reused for 1–4 weeks depending on the formulation and type and
frequency of its use. Dipsticks supplied with some products give only a rough indication
of the levels of active glutaraldehyde available in solutions under use. Glutaraldehyde
solutions should be discarded if they become turbid.
    Glutaraldehyde is toxic and an irritant to skin and mucous membranes, and contact
with it must be avoided. It must be used in a fume-hood or in well-ventilated areas. It
is not recommended as a spray or solution for the decontamination of environmental
surfaces. National chemical safety regulations must be followed.

Phenolic compounds
Phenolic compounds, a broad group of agents, were among the earliest germicides.
However, more recent safety concerns restrict their use. They are active against veg-
etative bacteria and lipid-containing viruses and, when properly formulated, also show


                                         • 86 •
                           14. DISINFECTION AND STERILIZATION



activity against mycobacteria. They are not active against spores and their activity
against nonlipid viruses is variable. Many phenolic products are used for the decon-
tamination of environmental surfaces, and some (e.g. triclosan and chloroxylenol)
are among the more commonly used antiseptics.
   Triclosan is common in products for hand-washing. It is active mainly against
vegetative bacteria and safe for skin and mucous membranes. However, in laboratory-
based studies, bacteria made resistant to low concentrations of triclosan also show
resistance to certain types of antibiotics. The significance of this finding in the field
remains unknown.
   Some phenolic compounds are sensitive to and may be inactivated by water hardness
and therefore must be diluted with distilled or deionized water.
   Phenolic compounds are not recommended for use on food contact surfaces and
in areas with young children. They may be absorbed by rubber and can also penetrate
the skin. National chemical safety regulations must be followed.

Quaternary ammonium compounds
Many types of quaternary ammonium compounds are used as mixtures and often in
combination with other germicides, such as alcohols. They have good activity against
some vegetative bacteria and lipid-containing viruses. Certain types (e.g. benzalkonium
chloride) are used as antiseptics.
    The germicidal activity of certain types of quaternary ammonium compounds is
considerably reduced by organic matter, water hardness and anionic detergents. Care
is therefore needed in selecting agents for precleaning when quaternary ammonium
compounds are to be used for disinfection. Potentially harmful bacteria can grow in
quaternary ammonium compound solutions. Owing to low biodegradability, these
compounds may also accumulate in the environment.

Alcohols
Ethanol (ethyl alcohol, C2H5OH) and 2-propanol (isopropyl alcohol, (CH3)2CHOH)
have similar disinfectant properties. They are active against vegetative bacteria, fungi
and lipid-containing viruses but not against spores. Their action on nonlipid viruses
is variable. For highest effectiveness they should be used at concentrations of
approximately 70% (v/v) in water: higher or lower concentrations may not be as
germicidal. A major advantage of aqueous solutions of alcohols is that they do not
leave any residue on treated items.
   Mixtures with other agents are more effective than alcohol alone, e.g. 70% (v/v)
alcohol with 100 g/l formaldehyde, and alcohol containing 2 g/l available chlorine. A
70% (v/v) aqueous solution of ethanol can be used on skin, work surfaces of laboratory
benches and biosafety cabinets, and to soak small pieces of surgical instruments. Since
ethanol can dry the skin, it is often mixed with emollients. Alcohol-based hand-rubs
are recommended for the decontamination of lightly soiled hands in situations where
proper hand-washing is inconvenient or not possible. However, it must be remembered


                                          • 87 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



that ethanol is ineffective against spores and may not kill all types of nonlipid viruses.
   Alcohols are volatile and flammable and must not be used near open flames. Working
solutions should be stored in proper containers to avoid the evaporation of alcohols.
Alcohols may harden rubber and dissolve certain types of glue. Proper inventory and
storage of ethanol in the laboratory is very important to avoid its use for purposes
other than disinfection. Bottles with alcohol-containing solutions must be clearly
labelled to avoid autoclaving.

Iodine and iodophors
The action of these disinfectants is similar to that of chlorine, although they may be
slightly less inhibited by organic matter. Iodine can stain fabrics and environmental
surfaces and is generally unsuitable for use as a disinfectant. On the other hand,
iodophors and tinctures of iodine are good antiseptics. Polyvidone-iodine is a reliable
and safe surgical scrub and preoperative skin antiseptic. Antiseptics based on iodine
are generally unsuitable for use on medical/dental devices. Iodine should not be used
on aluminium or copper.
    Iodine can be toxic. Organic iodine-based products must be stored at 4–10 °C to
avoid the growth of potentially harmful bacteria in them.

Hydrogen peroxide and peracids
Like chlorine, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and peracids are strong oxidants and can be
potent broad-spectrum germicides. They are also safer than chlorine to humans and
the environment.
   Hydrogen peroxide is supplied either as a ready-to-use 3% solution or as a 30%
aqueous solution to be diluted to 5–10 times its volume with sterilized water. However,
such 3–6% solutions of hydrogen peroxide alone are relatively slow and limited as
germicides. Products now available have other ingredients to stabilize the hydrogen
peroxide content, to accelerate its germicidal action and to make it less corrosive.
   Hydrogen peroxide can be used for the decontamination of work surfaces of
laboratory benches and biosafety cabinets, and stronger solutions may be suitable for
disinfecting heat-sensitive medical/dental devices. The use of vaporized hydrogen
peroxide or peracetic acid (CH3COOOH) for the decontamination of heat-sensitive
medical/surgical devices requires specialized equipment.
   Hydrogen peroxide and peracids can be corrosive to metals such as aluminium,
copper, brass and zinc, and can also decolorize fabrics, hair, skin and mucous
membranes. Articles treated with them must be thoroughly rinsed before contact with
eyes and mucous membranes. They should always be stored away from heat and
protected from light.

Local environmental decontamination
Decontamination of the laboratory space, its furniture and its equipment requires a
combination of liquid and gaseous disinfectants. Surfaces can be decontaminated using


                                          • 88 •
                           14. DISINFECTION AND STERILIZATION



a solution of sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl); a solution containing 1 g/l available
chlorine may be suitable for general environmental sanitation, but stronger solutions
(5 g/l) are recommended when dealing with high-risk situations. For environmental
decontamination, formulated solutions containing 3% hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) make
suitable substitutes for bleach solutions.
    Rooms and equipment can be decontaminated by fumigation with formaldehyde
gas generated by heating paraformaldehyde or boiling formalin. This is a highly
dangerous process that requires specially trained personnel. All openings in the room
(i.e. windows, doors, etc.) should be sealed with masking tape or similar before the gas
is generated. Fumigation should be conducted at an ambient temperature of at least
21 °C and a relative humidity of 70%. (See also section on Decontamination of
biological safety cabinets in this chapter.)
    After fumigation the area must be ventilated thoroughly before personnel are allowed
to enter. Appropriate respirators must be worn by anyone entering the room before it
has been ventilated. Gaseous ammonium bicarbonate can be used to neutralize the
formaldehyde.
    Fumigation of smaller spaces with hydrogen peroxide vapour is also effective but
requires specialized equipment to generate the vapour.

Decontamination of biological safety cabinets
To decontaminate Class I and Class II cabinets, equipment that independently generates,
circulates and neutralizes formaldehyde gas is available. Alternatively, the appropriate
amount of paraformaldehyde (final concentration of 0.8% paraformaldehyde in air)
should be placed in a frying pan on an electric hot plate. Another frying pan, containing
10% more ammonium bicarbonate than paraformaldehyde, on a second hot plate is
also placed inside the cabinet. The hot plate leads are plugged in outside the cabinet,
so that operation of the pans can be controlled from the outside by plugging and
unplugging the hot plates as necessary. If the relative humidity is below 70%, an open
container of hot water should also be placed inside the cabinet before the front closure
is sealed in place with strong tape (e.g. duct tape). Heavy gauge plastic sheeting is
taped over the front opening and exhaust port to make sure that the gas cannot seep
into the room. Penetration of the electric leads passing through the front closure must
also be sealed with duct tape.
   The plate for the paraformaldehyde pan is plugged in. It is unplugged when all the
paraformaldehyde has vaporized. The cabinet is left undisturbed for at least 6 h. The
plate for the second pan is then plugged in and the ammonium bicarbonate is allowed
to vaporize. This plate is then unplugged and the cabinet blower is switched on for
two intervals of approximately 2 s each to allow the ammonium bicarbonate gas to
circulate. The cabinet should be left undisturbed for 30 min before the front closure
(or plastic sheeting) and the exhaust port sheeting are removed. The cabinet surfaces
should be wiped down to remove residues before use.



                                          • 89 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Hand-washing/hand decontamination
Whenever possible, suitable gloves should be worn when handling biohazardous
materials. However, this does not replace the need for regular and proper hand-washing
by laboratory personnel. Hands must be washed after handling biohazardous materials
and animals, and before leaving the laboratory.
   In most situations, thorough washing of hands with ordinary soap and water is
sufficient to decontaminate them, but the use of germicidal soaps is recommended in
high-risk situations. Hands should be thoroughly lathered with soap, using friction,
for at least 10 s, rinsed in clean water and dried using a clean paper or cloth towel (if
available, warm-air hand-dryers may be used).
   Foot- or elbow-operated faucets are recommended. Where not fitted, a paper/cloth
towel should be used to turn off the faucet handles to avoid recontaminating washed
hands.
   As mentioned above, alcohol-based hand-rubs may be used to decontaminate lightly
soiled hands when proper hand-washing is not available.

Heat disinfection and sterilization
Heat is the most common among the physical agents used for the decontamination of
pathogens. “Dry” heat, which is totally non-corrosive, is used to process many items
of laboratory ware which can withstand temperatures of 160 °C or higher for 2–4 h.
Burning or incineration (see below) is also a form of dry heat. “Moist” heat is most
effective when used in the form of autoclaving.
   Boiling does not necessarily kill all microorganisms and/or pathogens, but it may
be used as the minimum processing for disinfection where other methods (chemical
disinfection or decontamination, autoclaving) are not applicable or available.
   Sterilized items must be handled and stored such that they remain uncontaminated
until used.

Autoclaving
Saturated steam under pressure (autoclaving) is the most effective and reliable means
of sterilizing laboratory materials. For most purposes, the following cycles will ensure
sterilization of correctly loaded autoclaves:
1. 3 min holding time at 134 °C
2. 10 min holding time at 126 °C
3. 15 min holding time at 121 °C
4. 25 min holding time at 115 °C.
Examples of different autoclaves include the following.
Gravity displacement autoclaves. Figure 10 shows the general construction of a gravity-
displacement autoclave. Steam enters the chamber under pressure and displaces the
heavier air downwards and through the valve in the chamber drain, fitted with a HEPA
filter.

                                          • 90 •
                                           14. DISINFECTION AND STERILIZATION



                                      pressure   safety        combined pressure         safety   cotton wool
                                       gauge     valve         and vacuum gauge          valve        filter



                                Jacket


                                                                                                  valve
                  to jacket
   steam supply




                  valve
                                                      baffle            chamber                           door
                  to chamber


to vacuum pump
 or steam ejector
                              Valve                                                               strainers

                  near-to-steam traps
                                                                                 valve




                                                                                                          WHO 02.139
                                                                   non-return valve



Figure 10. Gravity displacement autoclave


Pre-vacuum autoclaves. These machines allow the removal of air from the chamber before
steam is admitted. The exhaust air is evacuated through a valve fitted with a HEPA
filter. At the end of the cycle, the steam is automatically exhausted. These autoclaves
can operate at 134 °C and the sterilization cycle can therefore be reduced to 3 min. They
are ideal for porous loads, but cannot be used to process liquids because of the vacuum.
Fuel-heated pressure cooker autoclaves. These should be used only if a gravity displace-
ment autoclave is not available. They are loaded from the top and heated by gas,
electricity or other types of fuels. Steam is generated by heating water in the base of
the vessel, and air is displaced upwards through a relief vent. When all the air has been
removed, the valve on the relief vent is closed and the heat reduced. The pressure and
temperature rise until the safety valve operates at a preset level. This is the start of the
holding time. At the end of the cycle the heat is turned off and the temperature allowed
to fall to 80 °C or below before the lid is opened.

Loading autoclaves
Materials should be loosely packed in the chamber for easy steam penetration and air
removal. Bags should allow the steam to reach their contents.

                                                          • 91 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Precautions in the use of autoclaves
The following rules can minimize the hazards inherent in operating pressurized vessels.
 1. Responsibility for operation and routine care should be assigned to trained
    individuals.
 2. A preventive maintenance programme should include regular inspection of the
    chamber, door seals and all gauges and controls by qualified personnel.
 3. The steam should be saturated and free from chemicals (e.g. corrosion inhibitors)
    that could contaminate the items being sterilized.
 4. All materials to be autoclaved should be in containers that allow ready removal of
    air and permit good heat penetration; the chamber should be loosely packed so
    that steam will reach the load evenly.
 5. For autoclaves without an interlocking safety device that prevents the door being
    opened when the chamber is pressurized, the main steam valve should be closed
    and the temperature allowed to fall below 80 °C before the door is opened.
 6. Slow exhaust settings should be used when autoclaving liquids, as they may boil
    over when removed due to superheating.
 7. Operators should wear suitable gloves and visors for protection when opening the
    autoclave, even when the temperature has fallen below 80 °C.
 8. In any routine monitoring of autoclave performance, biological indicators or
    thermocouples should be placed at the centre of each load. Regular monitoring
    with thermocouples and recording devices in a “worst case” load is highly desirable
    to determine proper operating cycles.
 9. The drain screen filter of the chamber (if available) should be removed and cleaned
    daily.
10. Care should be taken to ensure that the relief valves of pressure cooker autoclaves
    do not become blocked by paper, etc. in the load.

Incineration
Incineration is useful for disposing of animal carcasses as well as anatomical and other
laboratory waste, with or without prior decontamination (see Chapter 3). Incineration
of infectious materials is an alternative to autoclaving only if the incinerator is under
laboratory control.
   Proper incineration requires an efficient means of temperature control and a
secondary burning chamber. Many incinerators, especially those with a single
combustion chamber, are unsatisfactory for dealing with infectious materials, animal
carcasses and plastics. Such materials may not be completely destroyed and the effluent
from the chimney may pollute the atmosphere with microorganisms, toxic chemicals
and smoke. However, there are many satisfactory configurations for combustion
chambers. Ideally the temperature in the primary chamber should be at least 800 °C
and that in the secondary chamber at least 1000 °C.
   Materials for incineration, even with prior decontamination, should be transported


                                          • 92 •
                          14. DISINFECTION AND STERILIZATION



to the incinerator in bags, preferably plastic. Incinerator attendants should receive
proper instructions about loading and temperature control. It should also be noted
that the efficient operation of an incinerator depends heavily on the right mix of
materials in the waste being treated.
   There are ongoing concerns regarding the possible negative environmental effects
of existing or proposed incinerators, and efforts continue to make incinerators more
environmentally friendly and energy-efficient.

Disposal
The disposal of laboratory and medical waste is subject to various regional, national
and international regulations, and the latest versions of such relevant documents must
be consulted before designing and implementing a programme for handling,
transportation and disposal of biohazardous waste. In general, ash from incinerators
may be handled as normal domestic waste and removed by local authorities. Autoclaved
waste may be disposed of by off-site incineration or in licensed landfill sites (see
Chapter 3).
For further information see references (13) and (29–39).




                                        • 93 •
15. Introduction to the transport
    of infectious substances


Transport of infectious and potentially infectious materials is subject to strict national
and international regulations. These regulations describe the proper use of packaging
materials, as well as other shipping requirements.
   Laboratory personnel must ship infectious substances according to applicable
transport regulations. Compliance with the rules will:
1. Reduce the likelihood that packages will be damaged and leak, and thereby
2. Reduce the exposures resulting in possible infections
3. Improve the efficiency of package delivery.

International transport regulations
The regulations for the transport of infectious materials (by any mode of transport)
are based upon the United Nations Model Regulations on the Transport of Dangerous
Goods (40). These recommendations are developed by the United Nations Committee
of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods (UNCETDG). To become legally
binding, the United Nations Model Regulations have to be introduced into national
regulations and international modal regulations by the competent authorities (e.g.
the Technical Instructions for the Safe Transport of Dangerous Goods by Air (41) of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) for air transport and the European
Agreement concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Road (ADR)
(42).
   The International Air Transport Association (IATA) issues Infectious Substances
Shipping Guidelines (43) every year. IATA guidelines must follow ICAO’s Technical
Instructions as a minimal standard, but may impose additional restrictions. IATA
guidelines must be followed if a shipment is carried by members of IATA.
   Since the United Nations Model Regulations on the Transport of Dangerous Goods is
a dynamic set of recommendations subject to biennial amendments, the reader is
referred to the latest issuances of national and international modal regulations for
applicable regulatory texts.
   WHO serves in an advisory capacity to UNCETDG. Major changes to the transport
regulations pertaining to the transport of infectious substances were introduced into
the 13th edition (2003) of the United Nations Model Regulations (40). Guidance on
the background to adopted amendments is available from WHO (44).


                                          • 94 •
              15. INTRODUCTION TO THE TRANSPORT OF INFECTIOUS SUBSTANCES



   International modal regulations are not intended to supersede any local or national
requirements. However, in situations where national requirements do not exist,
international modal regulations should be followed.
   It is important to note that international transport of infectious substances is also
dependent on and subject to national import/export regulations.

The basic triple packaging system
The triple packaging system, the choice for the transport of infectious and potentially
infectious substances, is exemplified in Figure 11. This packaging system consists of
three layers: the primary receptacle, the secondary packaging and the outer packaging.
   The primary receptacle containing the specimen must be watertight, leakproof and
appropriately labelled as to content. The primary receptacle is wrapped in enough
absorbent material to absorb all fluid in case of breakage or leakage.
   A second watertight, leakproof packaging is used to enclose and protect the primary
receptacle(s). Several wrapped primary receptacles may be placed in a single secondary
packaging. Volume and/or weight limits for packaged infectious substances are included
in certain regulatory texts.
   The third layer protects the secondary packaging from physical damage while in
transit. Specimen data forms, letters and other types of information that identify or
describe the specimen and identify the shipper and receiver, and any other
documentation required, must also be provided according to latest regulations.
   The United Nations Model Regulations prescribe the use of two different triple
packaging systems. The basic triple packaging system applies for the transport of a
variety of infectious substances; however, high-risk organisms must be shipped
according to more stringent requirements. For further details about the use of the
different packagings according to the materials to be transported, it is advisable to
consult national and/or international modal regulations for applicable regulatory texts.

Spill clean-up procedure
In the event of a spill of infectious or potentially infectious material, the following
spill clean-up procedure should be used.
1. Wear gloves and protective clothing, including face and eye protection if indicated.
2. Cover the spill with cloth or paper towels to contain it.
3. Pour an appropriate disinfectant over the paper towels and the immediately
   surrounding area (generally, 5% bleach solutions are appropriate; but for spills on
   aircraft, quaternary ammonium disinfectants should be used).
4. Apply disinfectant concentrically beginning at the outer margin of the spill area,
   working toward the centre.
5. After the appropriate amount of time (e.g. 30 min), clear away the materials. If
   there is broken glass or other sharps involved, use a dustpan or a piece of stiff
   cardboard to collect the material and deposit it into a puncture-resistant container
   for disposal.

                                         • 95 •
                              LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Packing and labelling of Category A infectious substances




Packing and labelling of Category B infectious substances




Figure 11. Examples of triple packaging systems
           (graphics kindly provided by IATA, Montreal, Canada)


                                           • 96 •
            15. INTRODUCTION TO THE TRANSPORT OF INFECTIOUS SUBSTANCES



6. Clean and disinfect the area of the spillage (if necessary, repeat steps 2–5).
7. Dispose of contaminated materials into a leakproof, puncture-resistant waste
   disposal container.
8. After successful disinfection, inform the competent authority that the site has now
   been decontaminated




                                        • 97 •
          PART V
Introduction to
 biotechnology
16. Biosafety and recombinant
    DNA technology


Recombinant DNA technology involves combining genetic material from different
sources thereby creating genetically modified organisms (GMOs) that may have never
existed in nature before. Initially there was concern among molecular biologists that
such organisms might have unpredictable and undesirable properties that could
represent a biohazard if they escaped from the laboratory. This concern became the
focus of a scientific conference held in Asilomar, CA, USA, in 1975 (45). At that meeting,
safety issues were discussed and the first guidelines for recombinant DNA technology
were proposed. The subsequent 25+ years of research experience have demonstrated
that genetic engineering may be conducted in a safe manner when an appropriate risk
assessment is performed and adequate safety measures are used.
   Recombinant DNA technology or genetic engineering was first used to clone DNA
segments in bacterial hosts in order to overexpress specific gene products for further
studies. Recombinant DNA molecules have also been used to create GMOs such as
transgenic and “knock-out” animals and transgenic plants.
   Recombinant DNA technology has already had an enormous impact on biology
and medicine, and will probably have an even greater influence now that the nucleotide
sequence of the entire human genome is available. Tens of thousands of genes of yet
unknown functions will be studied using recombinant DNA technology. Gene therapy
may become a routine treatment for certain diseases, and new vectors for gene transfer
are likely to be devised using genetic engineering techniques. Also, transgenic plants
produced by recombinant DNA technology may play an increasingly important role
in modern agriculture.
   Experiments involving the construction or use of GMOs should be conducted after
performing a biosafety risk assessment. The pathogenic properties and any potential
hazards associated with such organisms may be novel and not well-characterized. The
properties of the donor organism, the nature of the DNA sequences that will be
transferred, the properties of the recipient organism, and the properties of the
environment should be evaluated. These factors should help determine the biosafety
level that is required for the safe handling of the resulting GMO, and identify the
biological and physical containment systems that should be used.




                                         • 101 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Biosafety considerations for biological expression systems
Biological expression systems consist of vectors and host cells. A number of criteria
must be satisfied to make them effective and safe to use. An example of such a biological
expression system is plasmid pUC18. Frequently used as a cloning vector in
combination with Escherichia coli K12 cells, the pUC18 plasmid has been entirely
sequenced. All genes required for expression in other bacteria have been deleted from
its precursor plasmid pBR322. E. coli K12 is a non-pathogenic strain that cannot
permanently colonize the gut of healthy humans or animals. Routine genetic
engineering experiments can safely be performed in E. coli K12/pUC18 at Biosafety
Level 1, provided the inserted foreign DNA expression products do not require higher
biosafety levels.

Biosafety considerations for expression vectors
Higher biosafety levels may be required when:
1. The expression of DNA sequences derived from pathogenic organisms may increase
   the virulence of the GMO
2. Inserted DNA sequences are not well characterized, e.g. during preparation of
   genomic DNA libraries from pathogenic microorganisms
3. Gene products have potential pharmacological activity
4. Gene products code for toxins.

Viral vectors for gene transfer
Viral vectors, e.g. adenovirus vectors, are used for the transfer of genes to other cells.
Such vectors lack certain virus replication genes and are propagated in cell lines that
complement the defect.
   Stocks of such vectors may be contaminated with replication-competent viruses,
generated by rare spontaneous recombination events in the propagating cell lines, or
may derive from insufficient purification. These vectors should be handled at the same
biosafety level as the parent adenovirus from which they are derived.

Transgenic and “knock-out” animals
Animals carrying foreign genetic material (transgenic animals) should be handled in
containment levels appropriate to the characteristics of the products of the foreign
genes. Animals with targeted deletions of specific genes (“knock-out” animals) do not
generally present particular biological hazards.
   Examples of transgenic animals include animals expressing receptors for viruses
normally unable to infect that species. If such animals escaped from the laboratory
and transmitted the transgene to the wild animal population, an animal reservoir for
that particular virus could theoretically be generated.
   This possibility has been discussed for poliovirus and is particularly relevant in the
context of poliomyelitis eradication. Transgenic mice expressing the human poliovirus


                                         • 102 •
                     16. BIOSAFETY AND RECOMBINANT DNA TECHNOLOGY



receptor generated in different laboratories were susceptible to poliovirus infection
by various inoculation routes and the resulting disease was clinically and histo-
pathologically similar to human poliomyelitis. However, the mouse model differs from
humans in that alimentary tract replication of orally administered poliovirus is either
inefficient or does not occur. It is therefore very unlikely that escape of such transgenic
mice to the wild would result in the establishment of a new animal reservoir for
poliovirus. Nevertheless, this example indicates that, for each new line of transgenic
animal, detailed studies should be conducted to determine the routes by which the
animals can be infected, the inoculum size required for infection, and the extent of
virus shedding by the infected animals. In addition, all measures should be taken to
assure strict containment of receptor transgenic mice.

Transgenic plants
Transgenic plants expressing genes that confer tolerance to herbicides or resistance to
insects are currently a matter of considerable controversy in many parts of the world.
The discussions focus on the food-safety of such plants, and on the long-term ecological
consequences of their cultivation.
   Transgenic plants expressing genes of animal or human origin are used to develop
medicinal and nutritional products. A risk assessment should determine the appropriate
biosafety level for the production of these plants.

Risk assessments for genetically modified organisms
Risk assessments for work with GMOs should consider the characteristics of donor
and recipient/host organisms.
   Examples of characteristics for consideration include the following.

Hazards arising directly from the inserted gene (donor organism)
Assessment is necessary in situations where the product of the inserted gene has known
biologically or pharmacologically active properties that may give rise to harm, for
example:
 1. Toxins
 2. Cytokines
 3. Hormones
 4. Gene expression regulators
 5. Virulence factors or enhancers
 6. Oncogenic gene sequences
 7. Antibiotic resistance
 8. Allergens.
The consideration of such cases should include an estimation of the level of expression
required to achieve biological or pharmacological activity.



                                          • 103 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Hazards associated with the recipient/host
 1. Susceptibility of the host
 2. Pathogenicity of the host strain, including virulence, infectivity and toxin
    production
 3. Modification of the host range
 4. Recipient immune status
 5. Consequences of exposure.

Hazards arising from the alteration of existing pathogenic traits
Many modifications do not involve genes whose products are inherently harmful, but
adverse effects may arise as the result of alteration of existing non-pathogenic or
pathogenic traits. Modification of normal genes may alter pathogenicity. In an attempt
to identify these potential hazards, the following points may be considered (the list is
not exhaustive).
1. Is there an increase in infectivity or pathogenicity?
2. Could any disabling mutation within the recipient be overcome as a result of the
   insertion of the foreign gene?
3. Does the foreign gene encode a pathogenicity determinant from another organism?
4. If the foreign DNA does include a pathogenicity determinant, is it foreseeable that
   this gene could contribute to the pathogenicity of the GMO?
5. Is treatment available?
6. Will the susceptibility of the GMO to antibiotics or other forms of therapy be
   affected as a consequence of the genetic modification?
7. Is eradication of the GMO achievable?

Further considerations
The use of whole animals or plants for experimental purposes also requires careful
consideration. Investigators must comply with the regulations, restrictions and
requirements for the conduct of work with GMOs in host countries and institutions.
   Countries may have national authorities that establish guidelines for work with
GMOs, and may help scientists classify their work at the appropriate biosafety level. In
some cases classification may differ between countries, or countries may decide to
classify work at a lower or higher level when new information on a particular vector/
host system becomes available.
   Risk assessment is a dynamic process that takes into account new developments
and the progress of science. The performance of appropriate risk assessments will
assure that the benefits of recombinant DNA technology remain available to
humankind in the years to come.
For further information see references (17) and (46–48).




                                         • 104 •
             PART VI
Chemical, fire and
  electrical safety
17. Hazardous chemicals



Workers in microbiological laboratories are not only exposed to pathogenic
microorganisms, but also to chemical hazards. It is important that they have proper
knowledge of the toxic effects of these chemicals, the routes of exposure and the hazards
that may be associated with handling and storage (see Annex 5). Material safety data
sheets or other chemical hazard information are available from chemical manufacturers
and/or suppliers. These should be accessible in laboratories where these chemicals are
used, e.g. as part of a safety or operations manual.

Routes of exposure
Exposure to hazardous chemicals may occur by:
 1. Inhalation
 2. Contact
 3. Ingestion
 4. Needle-sticks
 5. Through broken skin.

Storage of chemicals
Only amounts of chemicals necessary for daily use should be stored in the laboratory.
Bulk stocks should be kept in specially designated rooms or buildings.
   Chemicals should not be stored in alphabetical order.

General rules regarding chemical incompatibilities
To avoid fire and/or explosions, substances in the left-hand column of Table 13 should
be stored and handled so that they cannot come into contact with the corresponding
substances in the right-hand column of the table.

Toxic effects of chemicals
Some chemicals adversely affect the health of those who handle them or inhale their
vapours. Apart from overt poisons, a number of chemicals are known to have various
toxic effects. The respiratory system, blood, lungs, liver, kidneys and the gastrointestinal
system, as well as other organs and tissues may be adversely affected or seriously
damaged. Some chemicals are known to be carcinogenic or teratogenic.


                                          • 107 •
                                LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Table 13. General rules for chemical incompatibilities
SUBSTANCE CATEGORY                        INCOMPATIBLE SUBSTANCES

Alkali metals, e.g. sodium, potassium,    Carbon dioxide, chlorinated hydrocarbons, water
caesium and lithium

Halogens                                  Ammonia, acetylene, hydrocarbons

Acetic acid, hydrogen sulfide, aniline,   Oxidizing agents, e.g. chromic acid, nitric acid,
hydrocarbons, sulfuric acid               peroxides, permanganates



   Some solvent vapours are toxic when inhaled. Apart from the more serious effects
noted above, exposure may result in impairments that show no immediate discernible
effects on health, but can include lack of coordination, drowsiness and similar
symptoms, leading to an increased proneness to accidents.
   Prolonged or repeated exposure to the liquid phase of many organic solvents can
result in skin damage. This may be due to a defatting effect, but allergic and corrosive
symptoms may also arise.
   For detailed information on the toxic effects of chemicals see Annex 5.

Explosive chemicals
Azides, often used in antibacterial solutions, should not be allowed to come into contact
with copper or lead (e.g. in waste pipes and plumbing), as they may explode violently
when subjected even to a mild impact.
   Ethers that have aged and dried to crystals are extremely unstable, and potentially
explosive.
   Perchloric acid, if allowed to dry on woodwork, brickwork or fabric, will explode
and cause a fire on impact.
   Picric acid and picrates are detonated by heat and impact.

Chemical spills
Most manufacturers of laboratory chemicals issue charts describing methods for
dealing with spills. Spillage charts and spillage kits are also available commercially.
Appropriate charts should be displayed in a prominent position in the laboratory. The
following equipment should also be provided:
 1. Chemical spill kits
 2. Protective clothing, e.g. heavy-duty rubber gloves, overshoes or rubber boots,
    respirators
 3. Scoops and dustpans
 4. Forceps for picking up broken glass
 5. Mops, cloths and paper towels
 6. Buckets


                                          • 108 •
                                     17. HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS



    7. Soda ash (sodium carbonate, Na2CO3) or sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3) for
       neutralizing acids and corrosive chemicals
    8. Sand (to cover alkali spills)
    9. Non-flammable detergent.
The following actions should be taken in the event of a significant chemical spill.
    1. Notify the appropriate safety officer.
    2. Evacuate non-essential personnel from the area.
    3. Attend to persons who may have been contaminated.
    4. If the spilled material is flammable, extinguish all open flames, turn off gas in the
       room and adjacent areas, open windows (if possible), and switch off electrical
       equipment that may spark.
    5. Avoid breathing vapour from spilled material.
    6. Establish exhaust ventilation if it is safe to do so.
    7. Secure the necessary items (see above) to clean up the spill.

Compressed and liquefied gases
Information regarding storage of compressed and liquefied gases is given in Table 14.


Table 14. Storage of compressed and liquefied gases
CONTAINER                                 STORAGE INFORMATION

Compressed gas cylinders and              • Should be securely fixed (e.g. chained) to the wall
liquefied gas containersa,b                 or a solid bench so that they are not inadvertently
                                            dislodged.
                                          • Must be transported with their caps in place and
                                            supported on trolleys.
                                          • Should be stored in bulk in an appropriate facility at
                                            some distance from the laboratory. This area should
                                            be locked and appropriately identified.
                                          • Should not be placed near radiators, open flames
                                            other heat sources, sparking electrical equipment,
                                            or in direct sunlight.

Small, single-use gas cylindersa,b        • Must not be incinerated.
a
  The main high-pressure valve should be turned off when the equipment is not in use and when the room
  is unoccupied.
b
  Rooms where flammable gas cylinders are used and/or stored should be identified by warning notices on
  the doors.


For further information see references (1) and (49–51), and Annex 5.




                                                • 109 •
18. Additional laboratory hazards



Laboratory personnel may confront hazards posed by forms of energy including fire,
electricity, radiation and noise. Basic information about each of these is presented in
this chapter.

Fire hazards
Close cooperation between safety officers and local fire prevention officers is essential.
Apart from chemical hazards, the effects of fire on the possible dissemination of
infectious material must be considered. This may determine whether it is best to
extinguish or contain the fire.
    The assistance of local fire prevention officers in the training of laboratory staff in
fire prevention, immediate action in case of fire and the use of fire-fighting equipment
is desirable.
    Fire warnings, instructions and escape routes should be displayed prominently in
each room and in corridors and hallways.
    Common causes of fires in laboratories are:
 1. Electrical circuit overloading
 2. Poor electrical maintenance, e.g. poor and perished insulation on cables
 3. Excessively long gas tubing or long electrical leads
 4. Equipment unnecessarily left switched on
 5. Equipment that was not designed for a laboratory environment
 6. Open flames
 7. Deteriorated gas tubing
 8. Improper handling and storage of flammable or explosive materials
 9. Improper segregation of incompatible chemicals
10. Sparking equipment near flammable substances and vapours
11. Improper or inadequate ventilation.
Fire-fighting equipment should be placed near room doors and at strategic points in
corridors and hallways. This equipment may include hoses, buckets (of water or sand)
and a fire extinguisher. Fire extinguishers should be regularly inspected and maintained,
and their shelf-life kept up to date. Specific types and uses of fire extinguishers are
shown in Table 15.



                                          • 110 •
                            18. ADDITIONAL LABORATORY HAZARDS



Table 15. Types and uses of fire extinguishers
TYPE                   USE FOR                           DO NOT USE FOR

Water                  Paper, wood, fabric               Electrical fires, flammable liquids,
                                                         burning metals

Carbon dioxide (CO2)   Flammable liquids and gases,      Alkali metals, paper
extinguisher gases     electrical fires

Dry powder             Flammable liquids and gases,      Reusable equipment and
                       alkali metals, electrical fires   instruments, as residues are very
                                                         difficult to remove

Foam                   Flammable liquids                 Electrical fires


For further information see reference (49).

Electrical hazards
It is essential that all electrical installations and equipment are inspected and tested
regularly, including earthing/grounding systems.
    Circuit-breakers and earth-fault-interrupters should be installed in appropriate
laboratory electrical circuits. Circuit-breakers do not protect people; they are intended
to protect wiring from being overloaded with electrical current and hence to prevent
fires. Earth-fault-interrupters are intended to protect people from electric shock.
    All laboratory electrical equipment should be earthed/grounded, preferably through
three-prong plugs.
    All laboratory electrical equipment and wiring should conform to national electrical
safety standards and codes.

Noise
The effect of excessive noise is insidious over time. Some types of laboratory equipment,
such as certain laser systems, as well as facilities where animals are housed, can produce
significant noise exposure to workers. Noise measurement surveys can be conducted
to determine the noise hazard. Where warranted by data, engineering controls such as
enclosures or barriers around noisy equipment or between noisy areas and other work
areas, can be considered. Where noise levels cannot be abated and where laboratory
personnel routinely experience excessive exposures, a hearing conservation programme
that includes the use of hearing protection while working in hazardous noise and a
medical monitoring programme to determine the effect of noise on the workers should
be instituted.

Ionizing radiation
Radiological protection is concerned with protecting humans against the harmful
effects of ionizing radiation, which include:



                                             • 111 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



1. Somatic effects, e.g. clinical symptoms observable in exposed individuals. Somatic
   effects include radiation-induced cancers, e.g. leukaemia and bone, lung and skin
   cancers, the onset of which may occur many years after irradiation. Less severe
   somatic effects include minor skin damage, hair loss, blood deficiencies, gastro-
   intestinal damage and cataract formation.
2. Hereditary effects, e.g. symptoms observed in the descendants of exposed indi-
   viduals. The hereditary effects of radiation exposure to the gonads include chromo-
   some damage or gene mutation. Irradiation of the germ cells in the gonads in high
   doses can also cause cell death, resulting in impaired fertility in both sexes or
   menstrual changes in women. Exposure of the developing fetus, particularly in
   weeks 8–15 of pregnancy, may increase the risk of congenital malformations, mental
   impairment or radiation-induced cancers in later life.

Principles of ionizing radiation protection
To limit the harmful effects of ionizing radiation, the use of radioisotopes should be
controlled and should comply with relevant national standards. Protection from
radiation is managed on the basis of four principles:
1. Minimizing the time of radiation exposure
2. Maximizing the distance from the radiation source
3. Shielding the radiation source
4. Substituting the use of radionuclides with non-radiometric techniques.
Protection activities include the following.
1. Time. The time of exposure experienced during manipulations of radioactive
   material can be reduced by:
   — Practising new and unfamiliar techniques without using the radionuclide until
      the techniques are mastered
   — Working with radionuclides in a deliberate and timely manner without rushing
   — Ensuring that all radioactive sources are returned to storage immediately after
      use
   — Removing radioactive waste from the laboratory at frequent intervals
   — Spending as little time as possible in the radiation area or laboratory
   — Exercising effective time management and planning of laboratory manipulations
      involving radioactive material.
   The less time spent in a radiation field, the smaller the received personal dose, as
   described in the equation:
                               Dose = Dose rate x time
2. Distance. The dose rate for most γ- and X-radiation varies as the inverse square of
   the distance from a point source:
                         Dose rate = Constant x 1/Distance2


                                        • 112 •
                          18. ADDITIONAL LABORATORY HAZARDS



   Doubling the distance from a radiation source will result in reducing the exposure
   by one-fourth over the same period of time. Various devices and mechanical aids
   are used to increase the distance between the operator and the radiation source,
   e.g. long-handled tongs, forceps, clamps and remote pipetting aids. Note that a
   small increase in distance can result in significant decrease in the dose rate.
3. Shielding. Radiation energy-absorbing or attenuating shields placed between the
   source and the operator or other occupants of the laboratory will help limit their
   exposure. The choice and thickness of any shielding material depends on the
   penetrating ability (type and energy) of the radiation. A barrier of acrylic, wood
   or lightweight metal, thickness 1.3–1.5 cm, provides shielding against high-energy
   β particles, whereas high-density lead is needed to shield against high energy γ-
   and X-radiation.
4. Substitution. Radionuclide-based materials should not be used when other
   techniques are available. If substitution is not possible, then the radionuclide with
   the least penetrating power or energy should be used.

Safe practices for work with radionuclides
Rules for working with radioactive substances should include considerations in four
areas:
1. Radiation area
2. Work-bench area
3. Radioactive waste area
4. Records and emergency response.
Some of the most important rules include the following:
1. Radiation area
   — Use radioactive substances only in dedicated areas.
   — Allow the presence of essential staff only.
   — Use personal protective equipment, including laboratory coats, safety spectacles
       and disposable gloves.
   — Monitor personal radiation exposures.
   Laboratories where radionuclides are used should be designed to simplify contain-
   ment, cleaning and decontamination. The radionuclide work area should be located
   in a small room adjoining the main laboratory, or in a dedicated area within the
   laboratory away from other activities. Signs displaying the international radiation
   hazard symbol should be posted at the entrance to the radiation area (Figure 12).
2. Work-bench area
   — Use spill trays lined with disposable absorbent materials.
   — Limit radionuclide quantities.
   — Shield radiation sources in the radiation, work bench and radioactive waste
     areas.

                                        • 113 •
                               LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Figure 12. International radiation
           hazard symbol




   — Mark radiation containers with the radiation symbol, including radionuclide
     identity, activity and assay date.
   — Use radiation meters to monitor working areas, protective clothing and hands
     after completion of work.
   — Use appropriately shielded transport containers.
 3. Radioactive waste area
    — Remove radioactive waste frequently from the working area.
    — Maintain accurate records of use and disposal of radioactive materials.
    — Screen dosimetry records for materials exceeding the dose limits.
    — Establish and regularly exercise emergency response plans.
    — In emergencies, assist injured persons first.
    — Clean contaminated areas thoroughly.
    — Request assistance from the safety office, if available.
    — Write and keep incident reports.




                                         • 114 •
             PART VII
Safety organization
       and training
19. The biosafety officer and
    biosafety committee


It is essential that each laboratory organization has a comprehensive safety policy, a
safety manual, and supporting programmes for their implementation. The
responsibility for this normally rests with the director or head of the institute or
laboratory, who may delegate certain duties to a biosafety officer or other appropriate
personnel.
    Laboratory safety is also the responsibility of all supervisors and laboratory
employees, and individual workers are responsible for their own safety and that of
their colleagues. Employees are expected to perform their work safely and should report
any unsafe acts, conditions or incidents to their supervisor. Periodic safety audits by
internal or external personnel are desirable.

Biosafety officer
Wherever possible a biosafety officer should be appointed to ensure that biosafety
policies and programmes are followed consistently throughout the laboratory. The
biosafety officer executes these duties on behalf of the head of the institute or laboratory.
In small units, the biosafety officer may be a microbiologist or a member of the technical
staff, who may perform these duties on a defined part-time basis. Whatever the degree
of involvement in biosafety, the person designated should possess the professional
competence necessary to suggest, review and approve specific activities that follow
appropriate biocontainment and biosafety procedures. The biosafety officer should
apply relevant national and international rules, regulations and guidelines, as well as
assist the laboratory in developing standard operating procedures. The person
appointed must have a technical background in microbiology, biochemistry and basic
physical and biological sciences. Knowledge of laboratory and clinical practices and
safety, including containment equipment, and engineering principles relevant to the
design, operation and maintenance of facilities is highly desirable. The biosafety officer
should also be able to communicate effectively with administrative, technical and
support personnel.
   The activities of the biosafety officer should include the following:
 1. Biosafety, biosecurity and technical compliance consultations.
 2. Periodic internal biosafety audits on technical methods, procedures and protocols,
    biological agents, materials and equipment.


                                           • 117 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



 3. Discussions of violation of biosafety protocols or procedures with the appropriate
    persons.
 4. Verification that all staff have received appropriate biosafety training.
 5. Provision of continuing education in biosafety.
 6. Investigation of incidents involving the possible escape of potentially infectious or
    toxic material, and reporting of findings and recommendations to the laboratory
    director and biosafety committee.
 7. Coordination with medical staff regarding possible laboratory-acquired infections.
 8. Ensuring appropriate decontamination following spills or other incidents involving
    infectious material(s).
 9. Ensuring proper waste management.
10. Ensuring appropriate decontamination of any apparatus prior to repair or servicing.
11. Maintaining awareness of community attitudes regarding health and environmental
    considerations.
12. Establishment of appropriate procedures for import/export of pathogenic material
    to/from the laboratory, according to national regulations.
13. Reviewing the biosafety aspects of all plans, protocols and operating procedures
    for research work involving infectious agents prior to the implementation of these
    activities.
14. Institution of a system to deal with emergencies.

Biosafety committee
A biosafety committee should be constituted to develop institutional biosafety policies
and codes of practice. The biosafety committee should also review research protocols
for work involving infectious agents, animal use, recombinant DNA and genetically
modified materials. Other functions of the committee may include risk assessments,
formulation of new safety policies and arbitration in disputes over safety matters.
   The membership of the biosafety committee should reflect the diverse occupational
areas of the organization as well as its scientific expertise. The composition of a basic
biosafety committee may include:
1. Biosafety officer(s)
2. Scientists
3. Medical personnel
4. Veterinarian(s) (if work with animals is conducted)
5. Representatives of technical staff
6. Representatives of laboratory management.
The biosafety committee should seek advice from different departmental and specialist
safety officers (e.g. with expertise in radiation protection, industrial safety, fire
prevention, etc.) and may at times require assistance from independent experts in
various associated fields, local authorities and national regulatory bodies. Community
members may also be helpful if there is a particularly contentious or sensitive protocol
under discussion.

                                         • 118 •
20. Safety for support staff



The safe and optimum operation of a laboratory is dependent to a great extent on the
support staff, and it is essential that such personnel are given appropriate safety training.

Engineering and building maintenance services
Skilled engineers and craftsmen who maintain and repair the structure, facilities and
equipment, should have some knowledge of the nature of the work of the laboratory,
and of safety regulations and procedures.
   Testing of equipment after servicing, e.g. testing the efficiency of biological safety
cabinets after new filters have been fitted, may be carried out by or under supervision
of the biosafety officer.
   Laboratories or institutions that do not have internal engineering and maintenance
services should establish good relationships with local service providers to familiarize
them with the equipment and work of the laboratory.
   Engineering and maintenance staff should only enter Biosafety Level 3 or Biosafety
Level 4 laboratories with clearance and supervision by the biosafety officer and/or the
laboratory supervisor.

Cleaning (domestic) services
Biosafety Level 3 and Biosafety Level 4 laboratories should be cleaned by the laboratory
staff. Cleaning personnel should only enter Biosafety Level 3 or Biosafety Level 4
laboratories with clearance and supervision by the biosafety officer and/or the
laboratory supervisor.




                                           • 119 •
21. Training programmes



A continuous, on-the-job safety training programme is essential to maintain safety
awareness among laboratory and support staff. Laboratory supervisors, with the
assistance of the biosafety officer and other resource persons, play the key role in staff
training. The effectiveness of biosafety training, indeed all safety and health training,
depends on management commitment, motivational factors, adequate initial job
training, good communications, and ultimately the organization’s goals and objectives.
The following are critical elements for an effective biosafety training programme.
1. Needs assessment. This process includes defining the tasks involved, the order of
   importance (in terms of frequency, criticality, complexity) and details of the steps
   necessary to accomplish them.
2. Establishing training objectives. These are observable behaviours that the trainee
   is expected to demonstrate, on the job, after the training. Objectives may acknow-
   ledge the conditions under which certain activities or behaviours are performed
   and the required level of proficiency.
3. Specifying training content and media. Content is the knowledge or skill that the
   trainee must master to be able to meet the behavioural objectives. Those individuals
   who know the job and its demands best usually define the content of the biosafety
   training programme. Other approaches used may focus on the products of problem-
   solving exercises or the design of learning measures to correct mistakes people
   have made in using a skill. It is not clear that one teaching method (lectures, televised
   instruction, computer-aided instruction, interactive video, etc.) is superior to
   another. Much depends on specific training needs, the make-up of the trainee group,
   etc.
4. Accounting for individual learning differences. Effective training must take into
   account the characteristics or attributes of the trainees. Individuals and groups
   may differ in aptitude, literacy, culture, spoken language and pre-training skill levels.
   How the training programme is viewed by trainees in terms of improving their job
   performance or personal safety may dictate the approach used. Some individuals
   are more visual or “hands-on” learners; others learn well from written materials.
   Any special needs of employees must also be addressed, such as course adaptation
   for those with hearing impairments. In addition to taking account of these elements,
   it is recommended that the developers of any safety training programme become
   acquainted with the principles of adult learning.

                                          • 120 •
                                21. TRAINING PROGRAMMES



5. Specifying learning conditions. The instructional event (e.g. training course,
   videotape, written materials, etc.) should not conflict with, inhibit or be unrelated
   to mastery of the skill or topic being taught. For example, if the intent of the in-
   struction is to develop capabilities in problem-solving techniques, the instructional
   approach should stress thinking/reasoning approaches rather than rote memori-
   zation. The instruction provided should require productive behaviour and/or ap-
   propriate feedback (positive/accurate/credible). In addition, instructional events
   that provide opportunities for practice under conditions similar to that of the job
   will enhance the transfer of the skill to the actual job.
6. Training evaluation. This provides information that helps to determine whether
   the instruction has had the intended effect. Training evaluations generally take
   four forms:
   — measuring the trainees’ reaction to the instruction provided
   — measuring the trainees’ recollection and/or performance
   — assessing behavioural change on the job
   — measuring tangible results in terms of the organization’s objectives or goals.
   The most complete evaluation of a training effort involves assessments for each of
   the four areas. The least efficient method of evaluation is to consider only the
   trainees’ reactions to the instruction as this may bear little relationship to the extent
   of actual learning. It should not be used as the sole measurement of training
   effectiveness.
7. Training revision. Training evaluations rarely indicate that a training programme
   is a complete success or failure because multiple criteria are used to measure results.
   Usually the data indicate a better understanding, retention or application of some
   parts of the course material as compared with others. Variation or gaps in knowledge
   or the desired competencies resulting from the training effort may reflect the need
   to consider more training time, alternative instructional techniques or more capable
   instructors.
WHO provides various tools for microbiological safety training.




                                          • 121 •
         PART VIII
Safety checklist
22. Safety checklist



This checklist is intended to assist in assessments of microbiological laboratory safety
and security status of biomedical laboratories.

Laboratory premises
 1. Have guidelines for commissioning and certification been considered for facility
    construction or post-construction evaluations?
 2. Do the premises meet national and local building requirements, including those
    relating to natural disaster precautions if necessary?
 3. Are the premises generally uncluttered and free from obstructions?
 4. Are the premises clean?
 5. Are there any structural defects in floors?
 6. Are floors and stairs uniform and slip-resistant?
 7. Is the working space adequate for safe operation?
 8. Are the circulation spaces and corridors adequate for the movement of people and
    large equipment?
 9. Are the benches, furniture and fittings in good condition?
10. Are bench surfaces resistant to solvents and corrosive chemicals?
11. Is there a hand-washing sink in each laboratory room?
12. Are the premises constructed and maintained to prevent entry and harbourage of
    rodents and arthropods?
13. Are all exposed steam and hot water pipes insulated or guarded to protect personnel?
14. Is an independent power support unit provided in case of power breakdown?
15. Can access to laboratory areas be restricted to authorized personnel?
16. Has a risk assessment been performed to ensure that appropriate equipment and
    facilities are available to support the work being considered?

Storage facilities
 1. Are storage facilities, shelves, etc. arranged so that stores are secure against sliding,
    collapse or falls?
 2. Are storage facilities kept free from accumulations of rubbish, unwanted materials
    and objects that present hazards from tripping, fire, explosion and harbourage of
    pests?
 3. Are freezers and storage areas lockable?


                                           • 125 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Sanitation and staff facilities
 1. Are the premises maintained in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition?
 2. Is drinking-water available?
 3. Are clean and adequate toilet (WC) and washing facilities provided separately for
    male and female staff?
 4. Are hot and cold water, soap and towels provided?
 5. Are separate changing rooms provided for male and female staff?
 6. Is there accommodation (e.g. lockers) for street clothing for individual members
    of the staff?
 7. Is there a staff room for lunch, etc.?
 8. Are noise levels acceptable?
 9. Is there an adequate organization for the collection and disposal of general
    household rubbish?

Heating and ventilation
 1. Is there a comfortable working temperature?
 2. Are blinds fitted to windows that are exposed to full sunlight?
 3. Is the ventilation adequate, e.g. at least six changes of air per hour, especially in
    rooms that have mechanical ventilation?
 4. Are there HEPA filters in the ventilation system?
 5. Does mechanical ventilation compromise airflows in and around biological safety
    cabinets and fume cupboards?

Lighting
 1. Is the general illumination adequate (e.g. 300–400 lx)?
 2. Is task (local) lighting provided at work benches?
 3. Are all areas well-lit, with no dark or ill-lit corners in rooms and corridors?
 4. Are fluorescent lights parallel to the benches?
 5. Are fluorescent lights colour-balanced?

Services
 1. Is each laboratory room provided with enough sinks, water, electricity and gas
    outlets for safe working?
 2. Is there an adequate inspection and maintenance programme for fuses, lights, cables,
    pipes, etc.?
 3. Are faults corrected within a reasonable time?
 4. Are internal engineering and maintenance services available, with skilled engineers
    and craftsmen who also have some knowledge of the nature of the work of the
    laboratory?
 5. Is the access of engineering and maintenance personnel to various laboratory areas
    controlled and documented?



                                         • 126 •
                                  22. SAFETY CHECKLIST



6. If no internal engineering and maintenance services are available, have local
   engineers and builders been contacted and familiarized with the equipment and
   work of the laboratory?
7. Are cleaning services available?
8. Is the access of cleaning personnel to various laboratory areas controlled and
   documented?
9. Are information technology services available and secured?

Laboratory biosecurity
 1. Has a qualitative risk assessment been performed to define risks that a security
    system should protect against?
 2. Have acceptable risks and incidence response planning parameters been defined?
 3. Is the whole building securely locked when unoccupied?
 4. Are doors and windows break-proof?
 5. Are rooms containing hazardous materials and expensive equipment locked when
    unoccupied?
 6. Is access to such rooms, equipment and materials appropriately controlled and
    documented?

Fire prevention and fire protection
 1. Is there a fire alarm system?
 2. Are the fire doors in good order?
 3. Is the fire detection system in good working order and regularly tested?
 4. Are fire alarm stations accessible?
 5. Are all exits marked by proper, illuminated signs?
 6. Is access to exits marked where the routes to them are not immediately visible?
 7. Are all exits unobstructed by decorations, furniture and equipment, and unlocked
    when the building is occupied?
 8. Is access to exits arranged so that it is not necessary to pass through a high-hazard
    area to escape?
 9. Do all exits lead to an open space?
10. Are corridors, aisles and circulation areas clear and unobstructed for movement of
    staff and fire-fighting equipment?
11. Is all fire-fighting equipment and apparatus easily identified by an appropriate
    colour code?
12. Are portable fire extinguishers maintained fully charged and in working order,
    and kept in designated places at all times?
13. Are laboratory rooms with potential fire hazards equipped with appropriate
    extinguishers and/or fire blankets for emergency use?
14. If flammable liquids and gases are used in any room, is the mechanical ventilation
    sufficient to remove vapours before they reach a hazardous concentration?
15. Are personnel trained to respond to fire emergencies?


                                         • 127 •
                              LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Flammable liquid storage
 1. Is the storage facility for bulk flammable liquids separated from the main building?
 2. Is it clearly labelled as a fire-risk area?
 3. Does it have a gravity or mechanical exhaust ventilation system that is separate
    from the main building system?
 4. Are the switches for lighting sealed or placed outside the building?
 5. Are the light fittings inside sealed to protect against ignition of vapours by sparking?
 6. Are flammable liquids stored in proper, ventilated containers that are made of
    non-combustible materials?
 7. Are the contents of all containers correctly described on the labels?
 8. Are appropriate fire extinguishers and/or fire blankets placed outside but near to
    the flammable liquid store?
 9. Are “No smoking” signs clearly displayed inside and outside the flammable liquid
    store?
10. Are only minimum amounts of flammable substances stored in laboratory rooms?
11. Are they stored in properly constructed flammable storage cabinets?
12. Are these cabinets adequately labelled with “Flammable liquid – Fire hazard” signs?
13. Are personnel trained to properly use and transport flammable liquids?

Compressed and liquefied gases
 1. Is each portable gas container legibly marked with its contents and correctly colour-
    coded?
 2. Are compressed-gas cylinders and their high-pressure and reduction valves regularly
    inspected?
 3. Are reduction valves regularly maintained?
 4. Is a pressure-relief device connected when a cylinder is in use?
 5. Are protection caps in place when cylinders are not in use or are being transported?
 6. Are all compressed gas cylinders secured so that they cannot fall, especially in the
    event of natural disaster?
 7. Are cylinders and liquid petroleum gas tanks kept away from sources of heat?
 8. Are personnel trained to properly use and transport compressed and liquefied gases?

Electrical hazards
 1. Are all new electrical installations and all replacements, modifications or repairs
    made and maintained in accordance with a national electrical safety code?
 2. Does the interior wiring have an earthed/grounded conductor (i.e. a three-wire
    system)?
 3. Are circuit-breakers and earth-fault interrupters fitted to all laboratory circuits?
 4. Do all electrical appliances have testing laboratory approval?
 5. Are the flexible connecting cables of all equipment as short as practicable, in good
    condition, and not frayed, damaged or spliced?
 6. Is each electric socket outlet used for only one appliance (no adapters to be used)?


                                          • 128 •
                                   22. SAFETY CHECKLIST



Personal protection
 1. Is protective clothing of approved design and fabric provided for all staff for normal
    work, e.g. gowns, coveralls, aprons, gloves?
 2. Is additional protective clothing provided for work with hazardous chemicals and
    radioactive and carcinogenic substances, e.g. rubber aprons and gloves for chemicals
    and for dealing with spillages; heat-resistant gloves for unloading autoclaves and
    ovens?
 3. Are safety glasses, goggles and shields (visors) provided?
 4. Are there eye-wash stations?
 5. Are there emergency showers (drench facilities)?
 6. Is radiation protection in accordance with national and international standards,
    including provision of dosimeters?
 7. Are respirators available, regularly cleaned, disinfected, inspected and stored in a
    clean and sanitary condition?
 8. Are appropriate filters provided for the correct types of respirators, e.g. HEPA filters
    for microorganisms, appropriate filters for gases or particulates?
 9. Are respirators fit-tested?

Health and safety of staff
 1. Is there an occupational health service?
 2. Are first-aid boxes provided at strategic locations?
 3. Are qualified first-aiders available?
 4. Are such first-aiders trained to deal with emergencies peculiar to the laboratory,
    e.g. contact with corrosive chemicals, accidental ingestion of poisons and infectious
    materials?
 5. Are non-laboratory workers, e.g. domestic and clerical staff, instructed on the
    potential hazards of the laboratory and the material it handles?
 6. Are notices prominently posted giving clear information about the location of
    first-aiders, telephone numbers of emergency services, etc.?
 7. Are women of childbearing age warned of the consequences of work with certain
    microorganisms, carcinogens, mutagens and teratogens?
 8. Are women of childbearing age told that if they are, or suspect that they are,
    pregnant they should inform the appropriate member of the medical/scientific
    staff so that alternative working arrangements may be made for them if necessary?
 9. Is there an immunization programme relevant to the work of the laboratory?
10. Are skin tests and/or radiological facilities available for staff who work with
    tuberculous materials or other materials requiring such measures?
11. Are proper records maintained of illnesses and accidents?
12. Are warning and accident prevention signs used to minimize work hazards?
13. Are personnel trained to follow appropriate biosafety practices?
14. Are laboratory staff encouraged to report potential exposures?



                                          • 129 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Laboratory equipment
 1. Is all equipment certified safe for use?
 2. Are procedures available for decontaminating equipment prior to maintenance?
 3. Are biological safety cabinets and fume cupboards regularly tested and serviced?
 4. Are autoclaves and other pressure vessels regularly inspected?
 5. Are centrifuge buckets and rotors regularly inspected?
 6. Are HEPA filters regularly changed?
 7. Are pipettes used instead of hypodermic needles?
 8. Is cracked and chipped glassware always discarded and not reused?
 9. Are there safe receptacles for broken glass?
10. Are plastics used instead of glass where feasible?
11. Are sharps disposal containers available and being used?

Infectious materials
 1. Are specimens received in a safe condition?
 2. Are records kept of incoming materials?
 3. Are specimens unpacked in biological safety cabinets with care and attention to
    possible breakage and leakage?
 4. Are gloves and other protective clothing worn for unpacking specimens?
 5. Are personnel trained to ship infectious substances according to current national
    and/or international regulations?
 6. Are work benches kept clean and tidy?
 7. Are discarded infectious materials removed daily or more often and disposed of
    safely?
 8. Are all members of the staff aware of procedures for dealing with breakage and
    spillage of cultures and infectious materials?
 9. Is the performance of sterilizers checked by the appropriate chemical, physical and
    biological indicators?
10. Is there a procedure for decontaminating centrifuges regularly?
11. Are sealed buckets provided for centrifuges?
12. Are appropriate disinfectants being used? Are they used correctly?
13. Is there special training for staff who work in containment laboratories – Biosafety
    Level 3 and maximum containment laboratories – Biosafety Level 4?

Chemicals and radioactive substances
 1. Are incompatible chemicals effectively separated when stored or handled?
 2. Are all chemicals correctly labelled with names and warnings?
 3. Are chemical hazard warning charts prominently displayed?
 4. Are spill kits provided?
 5. Are staff trained to deal with spills?
 6. Are flammable substances correctly and safely stored in minimal amounts in
    approved cabinets?


                                         • 130 •
                                22. SAFETY CHECKLIST



 7. Are bottle carriers provided?
 8. Is a radiation protection officer or appropriate reference manual available for
    consultation?
 9. Are staff appropriately trained to safely work with radioactive materials?
10. Are proper records of stocks and use of radioactive substances maintained?
11. Are radioactivity screens provided?
12. Are personal radiation exposures monitored?




                                       • 131 •
              PART IX
References, annexes
          and index
References



 1. Safety in health-care laboratories. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1997, (http://
    whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/1997/WHO_LAB_97.1.pdf).
 2. Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for isola-
    tion precautions in hospitals. American Journal of Infection Control, 1996, 24:24–52, (http:/
    /www.cdc.gov/ncidod/hip/isolat/isolat.htm).
 3. Hunt GJ, Tabachnick WJ. Handling small arbovirus vectors safely during biosafety level 3
    containment: Culicoides variipennis sonorensis (Diptera: Ceratopogonidae) and exotic blue-
    tongue viruses. Journal of Medical Entomology, 1996, 33:271–277.
 4. National Research Council. Occupational health and safety in the care and use of research
    animals. Washington, DC, National Academy Press, 1997.
 5. Richmond JY, Quimby F. Considerations for working safely with infectious disease agents
    in research animals. In: Zak O, Sande MA, eds. Handbook of animal models of infection.
    London, Academic Press, 1999:69–74.
 6. Biosafety in microbiological and biomedical laboratories, 4th ed. Washington, DC, United
    States Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
    vention/National Institutes of Health, 1999.
 7. Class II (laminar flow) biohazard cabinetry. Ann Arbor, MI, National Sanitation Founda-
    tion, 2002 (NSF/ANSI 49–2002).
 8. Richmond JY, McKinney RW. Primary containment for biohazards: selection, installation
    and use of biological safety cabinets, 2nd ed. Washington, DC, United States Department of
    Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/National Insti-
    tutes of Health, 2000.
 9. Microbiological safety cabinets. Recommendations for information to be exchanged between
    purchaser, vendor and installer and recommendations for installation. London, British Stand-
    ards Institution, 1992 (Standard BS 5726–2:1992).
10. Microbiological safety cabinets. Recommendations for selection, use and maintenance. Lon-
    don, British Standards Institution, 1992 (Standard BS 5726–4:1992).
11. Biological containment cabinets (Class I and II): installation and field testing. Toronto, Cana-
    dian Standards Association, 1995 (Standard Z316.3–95 (R2000)).
12. Collins CH, Kennedy DA. Laboratory acquired infections: history, incidence, causes and pre-
    vention, 4th ed. Oxford, Butterworth-Heinemann, 1999.
13. Health Canada. Laboratory biosafety manual, 2nd ed. Ottawa, Minister of Supply and Serv-
    ices Canada, 1996.
14. Biological safety cabinets – biological safety cabinets (Class I) for personnel and environment
    protection. Sydney, Standards Australia International, 1994 (Standard AS 2252.1–1994).
15. Biological safety cabinets – laminar flow biological safety cabinets (Class II) for personnel,
    environment and product protection. Sydney, Standards Australia International, 1994 (Stand-
    ard AS 2252.2–1994).

                                              • 135 •
                                LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



16. Standards Australia/Standards New Zealand. Biological safety cabinets – installation and
    use. Sydney, Standards Australia International, 2000 (Standard AS/NZS 2647:2000).
17. Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens. Guidance on the use, testing and mainte-
    nance of laboratory and animal flexible film isolators. London, Health and Safety Executive,
    1990.
18. Standards Australia/Standards New Zealand. Safety in laboratories – microbiological aspects
    and containment facilities. Sydney, Standards Australia International, 2002 (Standard AS/
    NZS 2243.3:2002).
19. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommendations for prevention of HIV trans-
    mission in health-care settings. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 1987, 36 (Suppl.
    2):1S–18S.
20. Bosque PJ et al. Prions in skeletal muscle. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
    the United States of America, 2002, 99:3812–3817.
21. Bartz JC, Kincaid AE, Bessen RA. Rapid prion neuroinvasion following tongue infection.
    Journal of Virology, 2003, 77:583–591.
22. Thomzig A et al. Widespread PrPSc accumulation in muscles of hamsters orally infected
    with scrapie. EMBO Reports, 2003, 4:530–533.
23. Glatzel M et al. Extraneural pathologic prion protein in sporadic Creutzfeld-Jakob disease.
    New England Journal of Medicine, 2003, 349:1812–1820.
24. Brown P, Wolff A, Gajdusek DC. A simple and effective method for inactivating virus infec-
    tivity in formalin-fixed tissue samples from patients with Creutzfield-Jakob disease. Neu-
    rology, 1990, 40:887–890.
25. Taylor DM et al. The effect of formic acid on BSE and scrapie infectivity in fixed and unfixed
    brain-tissue. Veterinary Microbiology, 1997, 58:167–174.
26. Safar J et al. Prions. In: Richmond JY, McKinney RW, eds. Biosafety in microbiological and
    biomedical laboratories, 4th ed. Washington, DC, United States Department of Health and
    Human Services, 1999:134–143.
27. Bellinger-Kawahara C et al. Purified scrapie prions resist inactivation by UV irradiation.
    Journal of Virology, 1987, 61:159–166.
28. Health Services Advisory Committee. Safe working and the prevention of infection in clinical
    laboratories. London, HSE Books, 1991.
29. Russell AD, Hugo WB, Ayliffe GAJ. Disinfection, preservation and sterilization, 3rd ed. Ox-
    ford, Blackwell Scientific, 1999.
30. Ascenzi JM. Handbook of disinfectants and antiseptics. New York, NY, Marcel Dekker, 1996.
31. Block SS. Disinfection, sterilization & preservation, 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Lippincott
    Williams & Wilkins, 2001.
32. Rutala WA. APIC guideline for selection and use of disinfectants. 1994, 1995, and 1996
    APIC Guidelines Committee. Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epi-
    demiology, INC. American Journal of Infection Control, 1996, 24:313–342.
33. Sattar SA, Springthorpe VS, Rochon M. A product based on accelerated and stabilized hy-
    drogen peroxide: evidence for broad-spectrum germicidal activity. Canadian Journal of
    Infection Control, 1998, 13:123–130.
34. Schneider PM. Emerging low temperature sterilization technologies. In: Rutala WA, eds.
    Disinfection & sterilization in health care. Champlain, NY, Polyscience, 1997:79–92.
35. Springthorpe VS. New chemical germicides. In: Rutala WA, eds. Disinfection & sterilization
    in health care. Champlain, NY, Polyscience, 1997:273–280.




                                             • 136 •
                                            REFERENCES



36. Steelman VM. Activity of sterilization processes and disinfectants against prions. In: Rutala
    WA, eds. Disinfection & sterilization in health care. Champlain, NY, Polyscience, 1997:255–
    271.
37. Taylor DM. Transmissible degenerative encephalopathies: inactivation of the unconven-
    tional causal agents. In: Russell AD, Hugo WB, Ayliffe GAJ, eds. Disinfection, preservation
    and sterilization, 3rd ed. Oxford, Blackwell Scientific, 1999:222–236.
38. Infection control guidelines for hand washing, cleaning, disinfection and sterilization in health
    care, 2nd ed. Ottawa, Laboratory Centre for Disease Control, Health Canada, 1998.
39. Springthorpe VS, Sattar SA. Chemical disinfection of virus-contaminated surfaces. CRC
    Critical Reviews in Environmental Control, 1990, 20:169–229.
40. Recommendations on the transport of dangerous goods, 13th revised edition, New York and
    Geneva, United Nations, 2003, (http://www.unece.org/trans/danger/publi/unrec/rev13/
    13files_e.html).
41. Technical instructions for the safe transport of dangerous goods by air, 2003–2004 Edition.
    Montreal, International Civil Aviation Organization, 2002.
42. Economic Commission for Europe Inland Transport Committee. Restructured ADR appli-
    cable as from 1 January 2003. New York and Geneva, United Nations, 2002, (http://
    www.unece.org/trans/danger/publi/adr/adr2003/ContentsE.html).
43. Infectious substances shipping guidelines. Montreal, International Air Transport Association,
    2003, (http://www.iata.org/ads/issg.htm).
44. Transport of Infectious Substances. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004, (http://
    www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/WHO_CDS_CSR_LYO_2004_9/en/).
45. Berg P et al. Asilomar conference on recombinant DNA molecules. Science, 1975, 188:991–
    994.
46. European Council. Council Directive 98/81/EC of 26 October 1998 amending Directive
    90/219/EEC on the contained use of genetically modified microorganisms. Official Jour-
    nal, 1998, L330:13–31.
47. O’Malley BW Jr et al. Limitations of adenovirus-mediated interleukin-2 gene therapy for
    oral cancer. Laryngoscope, 1999, 109:389–395.
48. World Health Organization. Maintenance and distribution of transgenic mice susceptible
    to human viruses: memorandum from a WHO meeting. Bulletin of the World Health Or-
    ganization, 1993, 71:497–502.
49. Furr AK. CRC handbook of laboratory safety, 5th ed. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 2000.
50. Lenga RE. The Sigma-Aldrich Library of Chemical Safety Data, 2nd ed. Milwaukee, WI,
    Aldrich Chemical Company, 1988.
51. Lewis RJ. Sax’s dangerous properties of industrial materials, 10th ed. Toronto, John Wiley
    and Sons, 1999.




                                               • 137 •
ANNEX 1

First aid


First aid is the skilled application of accepted principles of medical treatment at the
time and place of an accident. It is the approved method of treating a casualty until he
or she is placed in the care of a doctor for definitive treatment of the injury.
   The minimum first-aid equipment consists of a first-aid box, protective clothing
and safety equipment for the person rendering the first aid, and eye irrigation
equipment.

The first-aid box
The first-aid box should be constructed from materials that will keep the contents
dust- and damp-free. It should be kept in a prominent position and be easily recognized.
By international convention, the first-aid box is identified by a white cross on a green
background.
  The first-aid box should contain:
    1. Instruction sheet giving general guidance
    2. Individually-wrapped sterile adhesive dressings in a variety of sizes
    3. Sterile eye-pads with attachment bandages
    4. Triangular bandages
    5. Sterile wound coverings
    6. Safety pins
    7. A selection of sterile but unmedicated wound dressings
    8. An authoritative first-aid manual, e.g. one issued by the International Red Cross.
Protective equipment for the person rendering first aid includes:
    1. Mouthpiece for mouth-to-mouth resuscitation
    2. Gloves and other barrier protections against blood exposures,1 and
    3. Clean-up kit for blood spills (see Chapter 14 of the manual).
Eye irrigation equipment should also be readily available and staff trained in its correct
use.


1
     Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for isolation precautions
    in hospitals. American Journal of Infection Control, 1996, 24:24–52, (http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/hip/
    isolat/isolat.htm).


                                                   • 138 •
ANNEX 2

Immunization of staff


The risks of working with particular agents should be fully discussed with individual
researchers. The local availability, licensing state and utility of possible vaccines and/
or therapeutic drugs (e.g. antibiotic treatments) in case of exposure should be evaluated
before work with such agents is started. Some workers may have acquired immunity
from prior vaccination or infection.
   If a particular vaccine or toxoid is locally licensed and available, it should be offered
after a risk assessment of possible exposure and a clinical health assessment of the
individual have been carried out.
   Facilities for specific clinical case management following accidental infections should
also be available.




                                          • 139 •
ANNEX 3

WHO Biosafety
Collaborating Centres

Information on the availability of training courses, aids and materials may be obtained
by writing to any of the following:
• Biosafety programme, Department of Communicable Disease Surveillance and
  Response, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzer-
  land (http://www.who.int/csr/).
• WHO Collaborating Centre for Biological Safety, Swedish Institute for Infectious
  Disease Control, Nobels Väg 18, S-171 82 Solna, Sweden
  (http://www.smittskyddsinstitutet.se/English/english.htm).
• WHO Collaborating Centre on Biosafety Technology and Consultative Services,
  Office of Laboratory Security, Health Canada, 100 Colonnade Road, Loc.: 6201A,
  Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1A 0K9 (http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/pphb-dgspsp/ols-bsl).
• WHO Collaborating Centre for Applied Biosafety Programmes and Training,
  Office of Health and Safety, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton
  Road, Mailstop F05, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA (http://www.cdc.gov/).
• WHO Collaborating Centre for Applied Biosafety Programmes and Research,
  Division of Occupational Health and Safety, Office of Research Services, National
  Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, 13/3K04
  13 South Drive MSC 5760, Bethesda, MD 20892-5760, USA (http://www.nih.gov/).
• WHO Collaborating Centre for Biosafety, Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference
  Laboratory, 10 Wreckyn St, Nth Melbourne, Victoria 3051, Australia. Postal ad-
  dress: Locked Bag 815, PO Carlton Sth, Victoria 3053, Australia (http://www.
  vidrl.org.au/).




                                        • 140 •
ANNEX 4

Equipment safety


Certain items of equipment may create microbiological hazards when they are used.
Other items are specifically designed to prevent or reduce biological hazards (see
Chapter 11 of the manual).

Equipment that may create a hazard
Table A4-1 lists equipment and operations that may create hazards and suggests how
such hazards may be eliminated or reduced.


Table A4-1. Equipment and operations that may create hazards
EQUIPMENT        HAZARD                     HOW TO ELIMINATE OR REDUCE THE HAZARD

Hypodermic       Accidental inoculation,    • Do not recap or clip needles.
needles          aerosol or spillage        • Use a needle-locking type of syringe to
                                              prevent separation of needle and syringe, or
                                              use a disposable type where the needle is an
                                              integral part of the syringe unit.
                                            • Use good laboratory techniques, e.g.:
                                              — fill the syringe carefully to minimize air
                                                  bubbles and frothing of inoculum
                                              — avoid using syringes to mix infectious
                                                  liquids; if used, ensure that the tip of the
                                                  needle is held under the surface of the
                                                  fluid in the vessel and avoid excessive
                                                  force
                                              — wrap the needle and stopper in a cotton
                                                  pledget moistened with an appropriate
                                                  disinfectant before withdrawing the needle
                                                  from a rubber-stoppered bottle
                                              — expel excess liquid and air bubbles from
                                                  the syringe vertically into a cotton pledget
                                                  moistened with an appropriate disinfectant
                                                  or into a small bottle containing cotton.
                                            • Use a biological safety cabinet for all
                                              operations with infectious material.




                                           • 141 •
                               LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




EQUIPMENT           HAZARD                   HOW TO ELIMINATE OR REDUCE THE HAZARD

                                             • Restrain animals while they are being
                                               inoculated. Use blunt needles or cannulas for
                                               intranasal or oral inoculation. Use a biological
                                               safety cabinet.
                                             • Autoclave after use and ensure proper
                                               disposal. If a disposable needle and syringe
                                               unit is used, do not disassemble prior to
                                               autoclaving.

Centrifuges         Aerosols, splashing      • Use sealable buckets (safety cups) or sealed
                    and tube breakage          rotors. Open buckets or rotors after aerosols
                                               have settled (30 min) or in a biological safety
                                               cabinet.

Ultra-centrifuges   Aerosols, splashing      • Install a HEPA filter between centrifuge and
                    and tube breakage          vacuum pump.
                                             • Maintain a logbook of operating hours for
                                               each rotor and a preventive maintenance
                                               programme to reduce risk of mechanical
                                               failure.
                                             • Load and unload buckets or rotors in a
                                               biological safety cabinet.

Anaerobic jars      Explosion, dispersing    • Ensure integrity of wire capsule around
                    infectious materials       catalyst.

Desiccators         Implosion, dispersing    • Place in a stout wire cage.
                    glass fragments and
                    infectious materials

Homogenizer,        Aerosols, leakage and    • Operate and open equipment in a biological
tissue grinders     container breakage         safety cabinet.
                                             • Use specially designed models that prevent
                                               leakage from rotor bearings and O-ring
                                               gaskets, or use a stomacher.
                                             • Before opening the blender bowl, wait 30 min
                                               to allow the aerosol cloud to settle.
                                               Refrigerate to condense aerosols.
                                             • If manual tissue grinders are used, hold tube
                                               in a wad of absorbent material.

Sonicators,         Aerosols, impaired       • Operate and open equipment in a biological
ultrasonic          hearing, dermatitis        safety cabinet or sealed unit.
cleaners                                     • Ensure insulation to protect against
                                               subharmonics.
                                             • Wear gloves to protect skin against chemical
                                               effects of detergents.




                                            • 142 •
                                ANNEX 4. EQUIPMENT SAFETY




EQUIPMENT          HAZARD                   HOW TO ELIMINATE OR REDUCE THE HAZARD

Culture stirrers,  Aerosols, splashing      • Operate in a biological safety cabinet or
shakers, agitators and spillage               specially designed primary containment.
                                            • Use heavy-duty screw-capped culture flasks,
                                              fitted with filter-protected outlets, if
                                              necessary, and well secured.

Freeze-dryers      Aerosols and direct      • Use O-ring connectors to seal the unit
(lyophilizers)     contact contamination      throughout.
                                            • Use air filters to protect vacuum lines.
                                            • Use a satisfactory method of
                                              decontamination, e.g. chemical.
                                            • Provide an all-metal moisture trap and a
                                              vapour condenser.
                                            • Carefully inspect all glass vacuum vessels for
                                              surface scratches. Use only glassware
                                              designed for vacuum work.

Water baths        Growth of micro-         • Ensure regular cleaning and disinfection.
                   organisms. Sodium        • Do not use sodium azide for preventing
                   azide forms explosive      growth of organisms.
                   compounds with
                   some metals.


In addition to microbiological hazards, safety hazards associated with equipment
should also be anticipated and prevented. Table A4-2 lists examples of some of the
causes of accidents.




                                           • 143 •
                              LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



Table A4-2. Common causes of equipment-related accidents
ACCIDENT                  ACCIDENT CAUSE                 REDUCING OR ELIMINATING THE HAZARD

Faulty design or construction
Electrical fires in        No over-temperature cut-out   • Compliance with national
   incubators                                              standards.
Electrical shock          Failure to provide reliable
                            earthing/grounding

Improper use
Centrifuge accident       Failure to balance buckets     • Train and supervise staff.
                            on swing-out rotors
Anaerobic incubator       Use of incorrect gas           • Train and supervise staff.
  explosion

Improper adaptation
Explosion in domestic     Improper transport of liquid   • Use of specially designed
  vacuum flask              nitrogen                       equipment.
Explosion in domestic-    Dangerous chemical not        • Store low-flashpoint solvents
  type refrigerator         stored in spark-/explosion-   and extracts only in spark-/
                            proof container,              explosion-proof refrigerators or
                            e.g. diethyl ether with       cabinets.
                            leaking screw cap

Lack of proper maintenance
Fire in flame            Incorrect reassembly of         • Train and supervise staff.
   photometer              components during
                           maintenance




                                           • 144 •
ANNEX 5

Chemicals: hazards
and precautions

This annex lists the basic health and safety information, data and appropriate safety
precautions for a selected number of chemicals found commonly in health-care and
research laboratories. The list is not exhaustive and the absence of any particular
chemical does not imply that it is non-hazardous. All laboratory chemicals should be
treated with caution and in ways that will minimize exposure.




                                       • 145 •
          Table A5-1. Chemicals: hazards and precautions
          CHEMICAL       PHYSICAL PROPERTIES      HEALTH HAZARDS             FIRE HAZARDS           SAFETY PRECAUTIONS         INCOMPATIBLE CHEMICALS OTHER HAZARDS

          Acetaldehyde   Colourless liquid or     Mild eye and               Extremely flammable;   No open flames, no         Can form explosive
          CH3CHO         gas with a pungent,      respiratory tract          vapour/air mixtures    sparks, no smoking,        peroxides in contact
                         fruity odour;            irritation. Effects on     are explosive;         no contact with hot        with air. May polymerize
                         m.p. –121 °C             the central nervous        flash point –39 °C     surfaces. Store in         under influence of acids,
                         b.p. 21 °C.              system, respiratory        flammable range        tightly sealed             alkaline materials, in
                                                  tract and kidneys.         4–57%.                 containers in areas        the presence of trace
                                                  Possible carcinogen.                              separate from              metals. A strong
                                                                                                    oxidizers; store only if   reducing agent, reacts
                                                                                                    stabilized. Use in         violently with oxidants,
                                                                                                    exhaust cupboard or        with various organic
                                                                                                    with good ventilation.     substances, halogens,
                                                                                                    Wear rubber gloves,        sulfuric acid and
                                                                                                    safety goggles, and        amines.
                                                                                                    respiratory protection.




• 146 •
          Acetic acid    Colourless liquid with   Corrosive; causes          Flammable;             Do not breathe fumes.      Violent or explosive
          CH3CO2H        pungent odour;           severe burns; irritating   flashpoint 40 °C       In case of contact with    reaction with oxidizers.
                         m.p. 17 °C               vapour. Effects may        flammable range        eyes rinse immediately
                         b.p. 118 °C;             be delayed.                5.4–16%.               with water and seek
                                                                                                                                                                      LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




                         miscible with water.                                                       medical advice. Wear
                                                                                                    nitrile gloves and eye
                                                                                                    protection.

          Acetic         Colourless liquid with   Severe irritation of       Flammable; evolves     No open flames, no         Reacts violently with
          anhydride      a strong pungent,        eyes and upper             irritation or toxic    sparks, no smoking.        boiling water, steam,
          (CH3CO)2O      vinegar-like odour;      respiratory tract          fumes or gases in a    Prevent skin and eye       strong oxidants, alcohols,
                         m.p. –73 °C              irritation; corrosive      fire;                  contact.                   amines, strong bases and
                         b.p. 139 °C.             action. Effects may be     flashpoint 49 °C                                  many other compounds.
                                                  delayed.                   explosive limits                                  Attacks many metals
                                                                             2.7–10.3%.                                        in presence of water.
          Acetone        Colourless volatile       Slight eye, nose and     Highly flammable;      Keep container in            Reacts violently with         Earth/ground large
          CH3COCH3       liquid with sweetish      throat irritation.       flashpoint –18 °C      well-ventilated area;        oxidizers (e.g. chromic       containers and
                         odour;                    Inhalation may cause     explosive limits       keep away from               and nitric acids) and         vessels to prevent
                         m.p. –95 °C,              dizziness, narcosis      2.2–12.8%.             sources of ignition.         chloroform in the             static electricity.
                         b.p. 56 °C.;              and coma.                                       Do not breathe vapour.       presence of base.
                         miscible with water.                                                      Use respiratory              Incompatible with
                                                                                                   protection; wear eye         concentrated sulfuric
                                                                                                   protection.                  and nitric acid mixtures.

          Acetonitrile   Colourless liquid with    Respiratory, eye and     Highly flammable;      No open flames, no           Reacts with aqueous
          CH3CN          an aromatic odour;        skin irritation.         flashpoint 12.8 °C     sparks, no smoking,          acids and bases,
                         m.p –46 °C                Exposure may result in   explosive limits       no contact with oxidants.    producing toxic
                         b.p. 82 °C.               convulsions              3.0–16%.               Use only in areas free of    fumes. Reacts with
                                                   unconsciousness,                                ignition sources. Store      strong oxidants.
                                                   cyanide poisoning.                              in tightly sealed            Attacks some forms
                                                                                                   containers in areas          of plastic, rubber and
                                                                                                   separate from oxidizers.     coatings. Decomposes
                                                                                                   Work with exhaust            on burning producing




• 147 •
                                                                                                   ventilation. Avoid skin,     hydrogen cyanide and
                                                                                                   eye and mucous               nitrogen oxides.
                                                                                                   membrane contact. Use
                                                                                                   respiratory protection and
                                                                                                   rubber gloves.

          Acetylene      Colourless gas with       Simple asphyxiant;       Extremely flammable;   For skin protection use      Strong reducing agent;
                                                                                                                                                                                    ANNEX 5. CHEMICALS: HAZARDS AND PRECAUTIONS




          HC≡CH          a faint, ethereal or      frostbite on skin        flammable range        cold-insulating gloves       reacts violently with
                         garlic-like odour;        contact.                 2.5–100%.              and safety goggles or        oxidants and with
                         shipped under pressure,                                                   face shield. No open         fluorine or chlorine
                         dissolved in acetone;                                                     flames, no sparks, no        under influence of light.
                         m.p. –81 °C                                                               smoking. Work with           Reacts with copper,
                         sublimes at –84 °C.                                                       local exhaust ventilation,   silver and mercury or
                                                                                                   explosion-proof electrical   their salts, forming shock-
                                                                                                   equipment and lighting.      sensitive compounds.
          CHEMICAL         PHYSICAL PROPERTIES       HEALTH HAZARDS             FIRE HAZARDS        SAFETY PRECAUTIONS           INCOMPATIBLE CHEMICALS OTHER HAZARDS

          Acrolein         Colourless or yellow      Lacrimation. Severe        Highly flammable;   Prevent skin and eye         Oxidizers, acids, alkalis,
          CH2=CHCHO        liquid with a piercing,   respiratory irritation;    flashpoint –26 °C   contact. Work in fume        ammonia, amines. Poly-
                           disagreeable odour;       lung oedema at high        explosive limits    cupboard or with good        merizes readily unless
                           m.p. –87 °C               exposure levels.           2.8–31%.            ventilation.                 inhibited, usually with
                           b.p. 53 °C.               Effects may be delayed.                                                     hydroquinone. May
                                                                                                                                 form shock-sensitive
                                                                                                                                 peroxides over time.

          Ammonia          Colourless liquid with    Corrosive to eyes,         As ammonia gas;     Keep container tightly       Reacts violently with
          solutions        pungent odour; for gas:   respiratory system         flammable range     closed. In case of contact heavy metals such as
                           m.p. –78 °C               and skin on ingestion;     15–28%.             with eyes, rinse             mercury and their salts
                           b.p. –33 °C;              lung oedema at high                            immediately and seek         to form explosive
                           for 25% solution:         levels of exposure to                          medical advice. Work in      products.
                           m.p. –58 °C               gas or vapour.                                 fume cupboard. Wear
                           b.p. 38 °C;                                                              rubber or plastic gloves and
                           miscible with water.                                                     chemical-grade goggles.




• 148 •
          Aniline          Colourless to brown,      Cyanosis due to            Combustible;        Store in tightly sealed       Strong oxidizers,
          C6H5NH2          oily liquid with an       methaemoglobinaemia.       flashpoint 70 °C    containers in areas           strong acids.
                           aromatic amine-like       Eye and skin irritation.   explosive range     separate from oxidizers.
                           odour;                    May be absorbed            1.2–11%.            Prevent skin and eye
                                                                                                                                                                        LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




                           m.p. –6 °C                through the skin;                              contact. Work with local
                           b.p. 185 °C.              repeated or prolonged                          exhaust ventilation or
                                                     exposure may cause                             respiratory protection,
                                                     sensitization.                                 protective gloves, protective
                                                                                                    clothing, face shield.

          Auramine         Yellow flakes or          Harmful by ingestion,                          Avoid skin contact and      Strong oxidizing agents.
          4,4'-Carbono-    powder;                   inhalation and skin                            inhalation of dust. Wear
          imidoylbis       m.p. 136 °C;              contact. May cause                             rubber or plastic gloves
          (N,N-dimethyl-   insoluble in water.       eye or skin irritation.                        and chemical-grade goggles.
          benzenamine)                               Possible carcinogen.                           Work in fume cupboard or
                                                                                                    wear dust respirator.
          Benzene          Colourless volatile      Inhalation of vapour       Highly flammable;      Keep container in well-     Can react violently
          C 6H 6           liquid with              causes effects on          flashpoint –11 °C      ventilated area and away    with oxidizers
                           characteristic           central nervous            flammable range        from sources of ignition.   including chromic acid,
                           aromatic odour;          system resulting in        1.3–8%.                Work in fume cupboard       potassium
                           m.p. 6 °C                vertigo and headache;                             or hood with adequate       permanganate and
                           b.p. 80 °C.              at high concentrations,                           ventilation. Wear eye       liquid oxygen.
                                                    unconsciousness and                               protection and nitrile or
                                                    death. Risk of aplastic                           PVC gloves. Prevent
                                                    anaemia, leukaemia,                               formation of electrical
                                                    liver damage on                                   charges by earthing/
                                                    prolonged or chronic                              grounding.
                                                    exposure. May be
                                                    absorbed through skin.

          Benzidine        Light yellow powder;     May be absorbed            Combustible, gives     Avoid all exposure.         Use is prohibited or
          1,1'-Biphenyl-   m.p. 128 °C              through skin. May          off toxic fumes        Wear eye and skin           legally controlled in
          4,4'-diamine     b.p. 400 °C              cause bladder cancer.      (gases) in a fire.     protection. Work in fume    many countries.
                           slightly soluble in      Avoid all exposure.                               cupboard with exhaust




• 149 •
                           water but very soluble                                                     ventilation.
                           in acids and organic
                           solvents.

          Bromine          Dark reddish-brown       Corrosive. Vapour is       Not combustible but    Use in closed system        Strong oxidant,           Attacks some
          Br2              fuming liquid with       corrosive to eyes and      enhances combustion    and with ventilation.       reacts violently with     forms of plastic,
                           pungent odour;           respiratory tract;         of other substances.   Wear protective gloves      combustible and           rubber and
                                                                                                                                                                                ANNEX 5. CHEMICALS: HAZARDS AND PRECAUTIONS




                           m.p. –7.2 °C             inhalation may cause       Many reactions may     and clothing, safety        reducing materials.       coatings.
                           b.p. 58.8 °C.            lung oedema and            cause fire or          goggles, face shield        Reacts violently with
                                                    effects on central         explosion. Heating     or eye protection in        aqueous ammonia,
                                                    nervous system. Eye        will cause rise in     combination with            oxidants, metals,
                                                    contact can cause          pressure with risk     respiratory protection.     organic compounds
                                                    blurred vision, redness,   of burning.                                        and phosphorus.
                                                    pain, severe tissue
                                                    burns.
          CHEMICAL         PHYSICAL PROPERTIES      HEALTH HAZARDS              FIRE HAZARDS           SAFETY PRECAUTIONS          INCOMPATIBLE CHEMICALS OTHER HAZARDS

          Carbon dioxide   Translucent white        Risk of asphyxiation                               Wear protective             Alkali metals, strong
          (solid; “dry     solid at –79 °C;         in confined or poorly                              insulated gloves. Store     bases.
          ice”) CO2        sublimes to gas at       ventilated areas; contact                          only in ventilated room
                           ambient temperature.     with solid “dry ice”                               or area in open
                                                    causes frostbite.                                  container.

          Carbon tetra-    Colourless liquid with   May be absorbed             Not combustible.       Avoid all contact. Work     On contact with hot
          chloride         characteristic ether-    through skin; may           Gives off irritating   with ventilation, local     surfaces or flames,
          CCl4             like odour;              cause dermatitis on         or toxic fumes or      exhaust or respiratory      decomposes forming
                           m.p. –23 °C              prolonged exposure.         gases in a fire.       protection; use nitrile     toxic and corrosive
                           b.p. 76.5 °C.            Eye irritation. May                                gloves and protective       fumes and gases
                                                    cause liver and kidney                             clothing, face shield or    (hydrogen chloride,
                                                    damage and central                                 eye protection in           chlorine, phosgene).
                                                    nervous system                                     combination with            Reacts with some
                                                    disturbances resulting                             respiratory protection.     metals such as
                                                    in headache, nausea,                                                           aluminium,




• 150 •
                                                    slight jaundice, loss of                                                       magnesium, zinc.
                                                    appetite and narcosis.
                                                    An animal carcinogen.

          Chlorine         Greenish-yellow gas      Corrosive to eyes, skin Not combustible but        Work with closed system     Solution in water is a   Attacks many
                                                                                                                                                                                 LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




          Cl2              with pungent odour;      and respiratory tract.      enhances               and ventilation. Wear       strong acid, reacts      metals in
                           m.p. –101 °C             Inhalation of gas may       combustion of other    cold-insulating gloves,     violently with bases     presence of water.
                           b.p. –34 °C.             cause pneumonitis and substances.                  protective clothing,        and many organic         Attacks plastics,
                                                    lung oedema, resulting                             safety goggles or eye       compounds, acetylene,    rubber and
                                                    in reactive airways dys-                           protection in combination   butadiene, benzene       coatings.
                                                    function syndrome (RADS).                          with respiratory            and other petroleum
                                                    Rapid evaporation of the                           protection.                 fractions, ammonia,
                                                    liquid may cause frostbite.                                                    hydrogen, sodium
                                                    High exposures may                                                             carbide, turpentine
                                                    result in death. Effects                                                       and finely divided
                                                    may be delayed; medical                                                        metals causing fire
                                                    observation indicated.                                                         and explosion hazard.
          Chlorine       Yellow to red gas or     Severe irritation of          Not combustible         Work in closed system       A strong oxidant; reacts
          dioxide ClO2   a red-brown liquid;      eyes, skin and                but enhances            with ventilation. Wear      violently with combustible
                         m.p –59 °C               respiratory tract;            combustion of other     protective gloves and       and reducing materials.
                         b.p. 10 °C.              inhalation of gas may         substances; may         clothing, safety goggles    Reacts violently with
                                                  cause lung oedema.            explode on heating,     or eye protection in        phosphorus, potassium
                                                  Effects may be delayed;       on exposure to sun-     combination with            hydroxide, sulfur,
                                                  medical observation           light or if subjected   respiratory protection.     ammonia, methane,
                                                  indicated.                    to shock and sparks.                                phosphine and hydrogen
                                                                                                                                    sulfide.

          Chloroform     Colourless volatile      Harmful by inhalation,                                Wear protective             Strong bases; some           When heated to
          CHCl3          liquid with              ingestion and skin contact;                           clothing, nitrile gloves    metals such as               decomposition,
                         characteristic odour;    skin irritation. May cause                            and eye protection.         aluminium or                 forms phosgene
                         m.p. –63 °C              effects on liver, kidneys                             Work in a fume              magnesium, zinc              gas.
                         b.p. 61 °C;              and central nervous                                   cupboard.                   powder; strong               Attacks plastics,
                         slightly soluble in      system resulting in                                                               oxidizers.                   rubber.
                         water.                   headache, nausea, slight
                                                  jaundice, loss of appetite,




• 151 •
                                                  narcosis. Prolonged or
                                                  chronic exposure causes
                                                  cancer in animals; sus-
                                                  pected human carcinogen.

          Chromic acid   Dark red odourless       Irritation of eyes, skin Decomposes above             Prevent skin and eye        In aqueous solution is
          CrO3           flakes or powder often   and respiratory          250 °C to chromic            contact; avoid inhalation   a strong acid which
          Chromium VI    used in aqueous          system. Repeated or      oxide and oxygen             of fine dust and mist.      reacts with bases and
                                                                                                                                                                                     ANNEX 5. CHEMICALS: HAZARDS AND PRECAUTIONS




          oxide          solutions;               prolonged contact with with increased fire            Work with ventilation,      is corrosive. Strong
                         m.p. 197 °C.             skin may cause derma- hazard. Many                    local exhaust or            oxidant, reacts with
                                                  titis, chrome ulcers and reactions may cause          respiratory protection.     combustible, organic
                                                  skin sensitization.      hazards.                                                 or other readily
                                                  Inhalation may cause                                                              oxidizable materials
                                                  asthma-like reactions.                                                            (paper, wood, sulfur,
                                                  May cause perforation of                                                          aluminium, plastics
                                                  nasal septum. Human                                                               etc.). Corrosive to
                                                  carcinogen.                                                                       metals.
          CHEMICAL       PHYSICAL PROPERTIES      HEALTH HAZARDS             FIRE HAZARDS            SAFETY PRECAUTIONS          INCOMPATIBLE CHEMICALS OTHER HAZARDS

          Copper         Reddish, lustrous,       Inhalation of copper       Combustible.            Work with local exhaust     Shock-sensitive
          Cu             malleable, odourless     fume may cause metal                               or repiratory protection,   compounds are formed
                         solid; red powder,       fume fever.                                        protective gloves and       with acetylenic
                         turns green on                                                              goggles.                    compounds, ethylene
                         exposure to moist air;                                                                                  oxides azides and
                         m.p. 1083 °C                                                                                            hydrogen peroxide.
                         b.p. 2567 °C.                                                                                           Reacts with strong
                                                                                                                                 oxidants like chlorates,
                                                                                                                                 bromates and iodates,
                                                                                                                                 causing explosion hazard.

          Cyanogen       Colourless or white      Severe eye, skin and       Not combustible but     Work in closed system       Decomposes on heating
          bromide        crystals, with           respiratory tract          forms flammable gas     with ventilation. Wear      and on contact with
          BrCN           pungent odour;           effects; inhalation of     on heating. Gives off   protective gloves and       acids producing highly
                         m.p. 52 °C               vapour may cause lung      irritating or toxic     protective clothing,        toxic and flammable
                         b.p. 61 °C.              oedema which may           fumes or gases in       safety goggles face         hydrogen cyanide and




• 152 •
                                                  result in convulsions,     a fire.                 shield or eye protection    corrosive hydrogen
                                                  unconsciousness,                                   in combination with         bromide. Reacts with
                                                  respiratory failure and                            respiratory protection.     strong oxidants. Reacts
                                                  death.                                                                         slowly with water and
                                                                                                                                                                        LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




                                                                                                                                 moisture to produce
                                                                                                                                 hydrogen bromide and
                                                                                                                                 hydrogen cyanide.
                                                                                                                                 Attacks many metals in
                                                                                                                                 the presence of water.

          Cytochalasin   White powder;            Toxic by ingestion,                                Avoid contact with eyes,    Strong oxidizing agents.
          (A–J)          m.p. varies.             inhalation or absorption                           skin, clothing; wear
                                                  through skin. May                                  chemical-grade goggles
                                                  cause congenital fetal                             and rubber or plastic
                                                  malformation.                                      gloves.
          Diethyl ether     Colourless highly           Irritation of eyes and     Extremely flammable;   Keep container in well-     Exposure to air and
          C2H5OC2H5         volatile liquid with        respiratory tract . May    flashpoint –45 °C      ventilated area; keep       light may result in
                            sweet characteristic        affect central nervous     flammable range        away from sources of        formation of explosive
                            odour;                      system causing             1.7–48%.               ignition; earth/ground      peroxides. Can react
                            m.p. –116 °C                drowsiness and                                    containers to prevent       violently with oxidizers
                            b.p. 34 °C;                 unconsciousness.                                  static electrical           and halogens.
                            slightly soluble in         Repeated inhalation                               discharges. Work in
                            water.                      may cause addiction.                              fume cupboard. Wear
                                                                                                          nitrile gloves to prevent
                                                                                                          defatting of skin.

          Dimethylamine     Colourless volatile         Severe irritation of       Extremely flammable;   Keep away from sources      Can react with oxidizers,
          (CH3)2NH          liquefied gas with          eyes and respiratory       flashpoint –26 °C      of ignition; in case of     mercury.
                            pungent odour;              system; inhalation         flammable limits       contact with eyes rinse
                            m.p. –93 °C                 may cause lung oedema.     2.8–14%.               immediately and seek
                            b.p. 7 °C;                  Rapid evaporation may      Solution highly        medical advice. Work in
                            miscible with water.        cause frostbite.           flammable;             fume cupboard. Wear
                                                        Solution is corrosive to                          nitrile gloves and




• 153 •
                                                                                   flashpoint –18 °C.
                                                        eyes and skin.                                    chemical-grade goggles.

          2,4-Dinitro-     Orange-red crystalline       Irritation of skin and                            Keep moist to reduce        Can react vigorously
          phenyl-hydrazine powder;                      eyes. Harmful by                                  explosion risk. Wear        with oxidizers and
          C6H3(NO2)2-      m.p. 200 °C;                 ingestion, inhalation                             dust respirator, rubber     reducers.
          NHNH2            slightly soluble in water.   and skin contact.                                 or plastic gloves and
          1-Hydrazino-                                                                                    chemical-grade goggles.
                                                                                                                                                                  ANNEX 5. CHEMICALS: HAZARDS AND PRECAUTIONS




          2,4-dinitro-
          benzene
          CHEMICAL       PHYSICAL PROPERTIES       HEALTH HAZARDS            FIRE HAZARDS            SAFETY PRECAUTIONS            INCOMPATIBLE CHEMICALS OTHER HAZARDS

          Dioxane        Colourless liquid,        Irritation of eyes and    Highly flammable;       Work with ventilation,        Can form explosive
          C 4H 8O 2      with characteristic       respiratory tract. May    distant ignition        local exhaust. No open        peroxides. Reacts
          Diethylene     odour;                    affect central nervous    possible; as a result   flames, no sparks, no         vigorously with strong
          dioxide        m.p. 12 °C                system resulting in       of flow, agitation,     smoking, no contact           oxidants and
                         b.p. 101 °C.              headache, nausea,         etc., electrostatic     with strong oxidants or       concentrated strong
                                                   cough, sore throat,       charges can be          hot surfaces. Do not use      acids. Reacts
                                                   abdominal pain,           generated.              compressed air for filling,   explosively with some
                                                   dizziness, drowsiness,                            discharging or handling;      catalysts. Attacks many
                                                   vomiting, unconscious-                            use non-sparking tools.       plastics.
                                                   ness. May be absorbed                             Wear protective gloves,
                                                   through skin. Kidney                              clothing, face shield or
                                                   and liver damage.                                 eye protection, in
                                                   Probably a human                                  combination with
                                                   carcinogen.                                       respiratory protection.

          Ethanol        Colourless volatile       Harmful if ingested.      Highly flammable;       Keep container tightly        Reacts violently with




• 154 •
          CH3CH2OH       liquid with slight,       Irritation of eyes. May   flashpoint 12 °C        closed; keep away from        strong oxidizers.
                         characteristic odour;     affect central nervous    flammable limits        ignition sources.
                         m.p. –117 °C              system.                   3–19%.
                         b.p. 79 °C;
                                                                                                                                                                          LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




                         miscible with water.

          Ethanolamine   Colourless non-volatile   Corrosive to eyes,        Flashpoint 85 °C.       Wear rubber or plastic        Reacts with strong
          H2NCH2CH2OH    viscous liquid with       respiratory system                                gloves and eye                oxidizers.
          2-Amino-       ammoniacal odour;         and skin. May cause                               protection.
          ethanol        m.p 10 °C                 skin sensitization.
                         b.p. 171 °C;
                         miscible with water.
          Formaldehyde     Colourless liquid with   Severely irritation of      Flashpoint 50 °C.   Wear protective clothing    Can react vigorously       Concentrated
          solution         a pungent odour;         eyes and skin, irritation                       such as plastic apron,      with oxidizers, with       formaldehyde
          (37–41%          b.p. 96 °C;              of respiratory tract; pro-                      rubber or plastic gloves    nitromethane to            solutions become
          formaldehyde     miscible with water.     longed exposure to the                          and chemical-grade          produce explosive          cloudy if stored
          with 11–14%                               vapour may cause                                goggles. Work in fume       products, with             below 21 °C and
          methanol)                                 asthma-like symptoms,                           cupboard or well-           hydrochloric acid to       should be kept at
          HCHO                                      conjunctivitis, laryngitis,                     ventilated area.            produce the potent         21–25 °C. Dilute
                                                    bronchitis or broncho-                                                      carcinogen bis             solutions (1–5%)
                                                    pneumonia. May cause                                                        (chloromethyl) ether.      and medium-
                                                    sensitization by skin                                                                                  strength solutions
                                                    contact. Possible risk                                                                                 (5–25%) retain
                                                    of irreversible health                                                                                 many of the
                                                    effects. Possible                                                                                      hazards of the
                                                    carcinogen.                                                                                            concentrated form.

          Glutaraldehyde   Colourless or pale       Severe irritation of                            Work in fume cupboard       Can react vigorously       Often supplied in
          OHC(CH2)3CHO     yellow solution with     eyes and upper                                  or well-ventilated area.    with oxidizers.            aqueous solution
                           pungent odour;           respiratory tract;                              Wear rubber or plastic                                 at various concen-




• 155 •
                           m.p. –14 °C              prolonged inhalation                            gloves and eye                                         trations with added
                           b.p. 189 °C;             exposure or skin contact                        protection.                                            stabilizer to
                           miscible with water.     may cause sensitization.                                                                               enhance stability.

          Hydrochloric     Colourless fuming        Corrosive to eyes,                              Do not breathe fumes;       Reacts violently with      Releases highly
          acid (10–37%)    liquid with a pungent    respiratory system                              use respiratory protection. bases (solids and          toxic fumes in
          HCl              odour;                   and skin; repeated                              In case of contact with     concentrated solutions),   fires.
          Hydrogen         b.p. –121 °C;            inhalation of vapour                            eyes, rinse immediately     explosively with
                                                                                                                                                                                 ANNEX 5. CHEMICALS: HAZARDS AND PRECAUTIONS




          chloride         miscible with water.     can cause chronic                               with water and seek         solid potassium
                                                    bronchitis.                                     medical advice; in case of permanganate. Gives
                                                                                                    contact with skin, wash     off toxic or explosive
                                                                                                    immediately with plenty     gases on contact with
                                                                                                    of water. Work in fume      many metals.
                                                                                                    cupboard. Wear rubber
                                                                                                    or plastic gloves and eye
                                                                                                    protection (spectacles or
                                                                                                    goggles).
          CHEMICAL   PHYSICAL PROPERTIES       HEALTH HAZARDS             FIRE HAZARDS             SAFETY PRECAUTIONS          INCOMPATIBLE CHEMICALS OTHER HAZARDS

          Hydrogen   Colourless liquid;        Corrosive at high          Oxidizing agent;         In case of contact with     Reacts vigorously with       Can decompose
          peroxide   m.p. –39 °C (70%)         concentration (60%),       contact with             skin, wash immediately      a variety of chemical        evolving oxygen,
          H 2O 2     b.p. 125 °C (70%);        and at low                 combustible material     with plenty of water.       reagents including           causing pressure
                     miscible with water,      concentration (6%)         can cause fire.          Wear nitrile gloves and     oxidizers and bases.         rise in container.
                     supplied in aqueous       if contact with skin is                             eye protection if           Attacks most metals          Store in dark, cool
                     solution at various       prolonged. Dilute                                   concentration               or their salts, flammable    place. Do not use
                     concentrations.           solutions are irritating                            exceeds 20%.                liquids and other            metallic containers
                                               to eyes, respiratory                                                            combustible materials        or equipment, e.g.
                                               system and skin.                                                                (paper, textiles), aniline   brass, copper,
                                                                                                                               and nitromethane.            iron.

          Hydrogen   Colourless gas with       May cause effects on       Extremely flammable;     Work with ventilation,      Strong oxidizers and         Sense of smell
          sulfide    a strong odour of         central nervous system explosive limits             local exhaust. Wear         strong nitric acid.          becomes rapidly
          H 2S       rotten eggs;              resulting in headache,     4.3–46%.                 safety goggles or eye       Attacks many metals          fatigued and
                     b.p. –60 °C               dizziness, cough, sore                              protection in               and plastics.                cannot be relied




• 156 •
                     m.p. –85 °C.              throat, nausea, laboured                            combination with                                         on to warn of the
                                               breathing, unconscious-                             respiratory protection.                                  continuous
                                               ness and death. Inhala-                                                                                      presence of the
                                               tion may cause lung                                                                                          gas.
                                               oedema. Redness, pain,
                                                                                                                                                                                  LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




                                               severe deep burns of eyes.

          Iodine     Bluish-black              Irritation of eyes,        Not combustible             Do not breathe vapour;   Reacts violently with
          I2         crystalline scales with   respiratory system         but enhances                avoid contact with       metals including
                     a characteristic odour;   and skin. Repeated         combustion of other         eyes. Wear nitrile       aluminium, potassium
                     m.p. 114 °C               exposure may cause         substances. Many            gloves.                  and sodium, and with
                     b.p. 184 °C;              skin sensitization.        reactions may cause                                  ethanol/phosphorus
                     practically insoluble     May have effect on         fire or explosion. Gives                             mixtures, acetylene
                     in water.                 thyroid.                   off irritating or toxic                              and ammonia.
                                                                          fumes (or gases) in a fire.
          Mercury           Heavy silvery liquid;       May be absorbed            Not combustible.          Keep container tightly      Acetylene, fulminic         Store containers
          Hg                m.p. –39 °C                 through skin.              Gives off irritating or   closed. Work in fume        acid. Reacts with           and use over catch-
          (Quicksilver)     b.p. 357 °C;                Repeated exposure          toxic fumes in a fire.    cupboard or well-           ammonia, azides and         ment trays to
                            insoluble in water.         may affect kidneys                                   ventilated area. Prevent    ethylene oxide to form      contain spillage;
                                                        and central nervous                                  spills. Observe strict      explosive products.         suck up spilt drop-
                                                        system, and may cause                                hygiene. Wear nitrile       Reacts violently with       lets into a small
                                                        vomiting, diarrhoea,                                 gloves.                     bromine. Forms              respiratory bottle
                                                        headache, nausea,                                                                amalgams with many          fitted with a capillary
                                                        swollen gums, loose                                                              metals.                     connecting tube
                                                        teeth.                                                                                                       and connected to
                                                                                                                                                                     a pump; treat spilt
                                                                                                                                                                     areas with zinc dust
                                                                                                                                                                     to form an amalgam.

          Methanol          Colourless volatile         Effects on central         Highly flammable;         Keep container tightly      Can react vigorously
          CH3OH             liquid with                 nervous system result-     flashpoint –16 °C         closed; keep away from      with oxidizers. Reactions
                            characteristic odour;       ing in unconsciousness;    flammable range           ignition sources. Avoid     with magnesium or
                            m.p. –98 °C                 mucous membrane            7–37%.                    breathing vapour and        bromine can be violent




• 157 •
                            b.p. 65 °C;                 irritation. Chronic                                  contact with skin. Work     and those with strong
                            miscible with water.        exposure can cause                                   in fume cupboard or well-   oxidants or chloroform
                                                        damage to retina and                                 ventilated area. Wear       with sodium can be
                                                        optic nerve. Prolonged                               rubber or plastic gloves    explosive.
                                                        skin contact may cause                               and eye protection.
                                                        dermatitis. May be
                                                        absorbed through skin.
                                                                                                                                                                                               ANNEX 5. CHEMICALS: HAZARDS AND PRECAUTIONS




          Naphthylamine White to pink crystals          Both forms very toxic      Combustible.              Avoid all exposure; wear                                Use is prohibited or
          (alpha and beta) with characteristic odour;   by inhalation, ingestion                             suitable protective                                     legally controlled in
          C10H9N           alpha: m.p. 50 °C            and skin contact.                                    clothing. Work in fume                                  many countries.
          N-phenyl-α-      b.p. 301 °C;                 Human carcinogen                                     cupboard or hood, or
          naphthylamine beta: m.p. 113 °C               causing bladder cancer.                              with exhaust ventilation.
          and              b.p. 306 °C;                 Experimental mutagen
          N-phenyl-β-      poorly soluble in water      and teratogen.
          naphthylamine but hydrochloride is            Absorbed through skin.
                           water-soluble.
          CHEMICAL       PHYSICAL PROPERTIES          HEALTH HAZARDS            FIRE HAZARDS          SAFETY PRECAUTIONS          INCOMPATIBLE CHEMICALS OTHER HAZARDS

          Ninhydrin      Pale yellow solid,           Harmful by ingestion       Flammable,           Avoid inhalation of the                                Contact with skin
          C 9H 6O 4      decomposes before            and inhalation. Irritation combustible solid;   spray or vapour and                                    produces a
                         melting at 241 °C.           of eyes, respiratory       flashpoint 39 °C.    contact with eyes. Wear                                persistent violet
                         Supplied in aerosol          system and skin.                                rubber or plastic gloves                               stain.
                         spray cans as 0.5%           Repeated exposure may                           and chemical-grade
                         solution in butanol;         cause skin sensitization.                       goggles.
                         soluble in water.

          Nitric acid    Colourless or pale           Corrosive; causes         Oxidizer; contact     Do not breathe vapour;      Acetic acid, chromic       Concentrated nitric
          (50–70%)       yellow fuming liquid;        severe burns to eyes      with combustible      use respiratory protection. acid, hydrocyanic acid,    acid is involved in
          HNO3           m.p. –42 °C                  and skin. Inhalation of   material may cause    In case of contact with     aniline, carbon,           more dangerous
                         b.p. 83–121 °C;              vapour may cause lung     fire. Evolves toxic   eyes, rinse immediately     hydrogen sulfide, bases,   reactions than any
                         miscible in water.           oedema.                   fumes in a fire.      and seek medical attention; metals and many other      other chemical
                                                                                                      in case of contact with     substances.                reagent.
                                                                                                      skin, wash off immediately;
                                                                                                      remove contaminated




• 158 •
                                                                                                      clothing. Wear PVC gloves,
                                                                                                      plastic apron and chemical-
                                                                                                      grade goggles. Work in
                                                                                                      fume cupboard.
                                                                                                                                                                                   LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




          Nitrobenzene   Pale yellow oily liquid,     Methaemoglobinanaemia Combustible; risk of      Work with ventilation,      On combustion forms
          C6H5NO2        with characteristic odour;   with cyanosis, liver    fire and explosion;     local exhaust or            corrosive fumes including
                         m.p. 6 °C                    damage; symptoms        flashpoint 88 °C.       respiratory protection.     nitrogen oxides. Reacts
                         b.p. 211 °C.                 include blue lips or                            Wear protective             violently with strong
                                                      fingernails, blue skin,                         gloves, protective          oxidants and reducing
                                                      dizziness, nausea,                              clothing, safety goggles.   agents, causing fire and
                                                      weakness, unconscious-                                                      explosion hazard. Attacks
                                                      ness. Absorbed through                                                      many plastics. Forms ex-
                                                      skin.                                                                       plosive (thermally unstable)
                                                                                                                                  substances or mixtures
                                                                                                                                  with many organic and
                                                                                                                                  inorganic compounds.
          Osmium        Pale yellow crystals with   Very toxic by inhalation,   Powerful oxidizing     Keep container tightly
          tetroxide     pungent odour;              ingestion and skin          agent. Not combustible closed and in a well-
          OsO4          m.p. 40 °C                  contact, causing severe     but enhances           ventilated area. Work with
                        b.p. 130 °C;                burns and irritation.       combustion of other    solid and solutions in fume
                        sublimes below boiling      Vapour, solid and           substances.            cupboard or hood. Wear
                        point; soluble in water.    solutions are corrosive                            chemical-grade goggles
                                                    to skin and respiratory                            and protective gloves. To
                                                    tract. Inhalation may                              make up solutions, add
                                                    cause lung oedema.                                 unopened ampoule to
                                                                                                       required volume of water,
                                                                                                       stopper and shake to break
                                                                                                       ampoule.

          Oxalic acid   Colourless crystals;        Harmful if in contact      Combustible. Gives       Avoid contact with skin      Oxidizing agents; also
          HO2CCO2H      soluble in water;           with skin or if ingested. off irritating or toxic   and eyes; wear eye           silver and mercury
                        m.p. 190 °C,                Dust irritates respiratory fumes (or gases) in a    protection and gloves.       and their compounds.
                        decomposes.                 tract and eyes. Solutions fire.
                                                    irritate eyes and may




• 159 •
                                                    cause skin burns.

          Oxygen        Colourless compressed       At very high concen-        Not combustible but      No open flames, no          A strong oxidant, reacts
          O2            gas;                        trations, irritation of     enhances combustion sparks, no smoking, no           with combustible and
                        m.p. –218.4 °C              respiratory tract.          of other substances.     contact with flammable      reducing materials,
                        b.p. –183 °C.                                           Heating will cause rise substances.                  causing fire and explosion
                                                                                in pressure of container                             hazard. Reacts with oils,
                                                                                                                                                                  ANNEX 5. CHEMICALS: HAZARDS AND PRECAUTIONS




                                                                                with risk of bursting.                               greases, hydrogen, and
                                                                                                                                     flammable liquids, solids
                                                                                                                                     and gases.
          CHEMICAL          PHYSICAL PROPERTIES     HEALTH HAZARDS                FIRE HAZARDS           SAFETY PRECAUTIONS         INCOMPATIBLE CHEMICALS OTHER HAZARDS

          Perchloric acid   Colourless liquid;      Corrosive; causes severe      Powerful oxidizing     Avoid breathing vapour    Combustible materials     Powerful oxidizing
          HClO4             miscible with water.    burns to eyes and skin        agent. Not combustible and other exposure; wear and reducing agents:       agent; may form
                                                    and if ingested. Vapour       but enhances           protective clothing       acetic anhydride,         explosive products
                                                    is corrosive to eyes, skin,   combustion of other    including nitrile gloves, bismuth and its alloys,   if in contact with
                                                    and respiratory tract.        substances.            eye and face protection.  alcohol, metal, paper,    many inorganic and
                                                    Inhalation of vapours                                With hot solutions work   wood and other organic    organic materials;
                                                    may cause lung                                       in fume cupboard or hood. materials.                contaminated wood-
                                                    oedema.                                                                                                  en floors, benches,
                                                                                                                                                             etc. May explode on
                                                                                                                                                             percussion.

          Phenol            Colourless or pale      Substance and vapours Flashpoint 80 °C               Do not breathe vapour;      Reacts with oxidants
          C6H5OH            pink crystals with      are corrosive to eyes,    flammable range            use respiratory protection. causing fire and
                            characteristic odour;   skin and respiratory      1.7–6%.                    Avoid eye and skin contact. explosion hazard.
                            m.p. 41 °C              tract causing severe                                 Work in fume cupboard.
                            b.p. 182 °C;            burns; absorbed through                              Wear nitrile gloves and




• 160 •
                            soluble in water.       skin. Central nervous                                eye protection. In case of
                                                    system disturbance,                                  contact with eyes, rinse
                                                    coma. Kidney and liver                               immediately with water
                                                    damage. Symptoms                                     and seek medical advice;
                                                                                                                                                                                   LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




                                                    include abdominal pain,                              in case of contact with
                                                    vomiting, diarrhoea, skin                            skin, remove any
                                                    irritation, eye pain.                                contaminated clothing
                                                    Prolonged contact with                               and swab the
                                                    dilute solutions may                                 contaminated area with
                                                    cause dermatitis.                                    glycerol, polyethylene
                                                                                                         glycol 300 or a mixture
                                                                                                         of liquid polyethylene
                                                                                                         glycol (70%) and methyl-
                                                                                                         ated spirit (30%) and then
                                                                                                         flush with water.
          Phosphoric       Colourless viscous           Corrosive; causes           Attacks many metals      In case of contact with
          acid             liquid or hygroscopic        burns to the skin and       producing hydrogen.      eyes, rinse with water and
          H3PO4            white crystals;              eyes.                       Gives off toxic fumes    obtain medical advice.
                           m.p. 42 °C                                               in a fire.               Wear nitrile gloves and
                           decomposes below                                                                  eye protection.
                           boiling point at 213 °C;
                           soluble in water.

          Phosphorus       Hygroscopic white            Corrosive to the eyes,      Not combustible but      Work with local exhaust       Solution in water is a
          pentoxide        crystals or powder;          skin, respiratory tract,    enhances combustion protection. Wear                   strong acid; reacts
          P 2O 5           m.p. 340 °C, sublimation     leading to sore throat,     of other substances.     protective gloves and         violently with bases and
                           point 360 °C.                cough, burning              Many reactions may       clothing, face shield, or     is corrosive. Reacts
                                                        sensation, shortness of     cause fire or explosion. eye protection in             violently with perchloric
                                                        breath; skin burns, pain,   Gives off irritating or  combination with              acid causing fire and
                                                        blisters, eye burns.        toxic fumes (or gases) respiratory protection.         explosion hazard. Reacts
                                                        Inhalation may cause        in a fire.                                             violently with water
                                                        lung oedema. Ingestion                                                             forming phosphoric acid.
                                                        may cause abdominal                                                                Attacks many metals in




• 161 •
                                                        cramps, burning                                                                    presence of water.
                                                        sensation, diarrhoea,
                                                        sore throat, vomiting.

          Picric acid      Yellow crystals              Toxic by ingestion,         Explosive when dry.      Keep moistened with           Forms salts with many     Yellow skin stains.
          C6H2(NO2)3OH     moistened with water         inhalation or skin                                   water at all times or use     metals which are more
          2,4,6-           or dissolved in alcohol;     contact. Ingestion may                               only in alcoholic solution.   explosive than the acid
                                                                                                                                                                                           ANNEX 5. CHEMICALS: HAZARDS AND PRECAUTIONS




          Trinitrophenol   m.p. 122 °C;                 result in headache,                                                                itself. In contact with
                           slightly soluble in water.   nausea. Irritation of                                                              concrete may form
                                                        eyes.                                                                              calcium picrate, which is
                                                                                                                                           a friction-sensitive
                                                                                                                                           explosive. May react
                                                                                                                                           vigorously with reducing
                                                                                                                                           agents.
          CHEMICAL       PHYSICAL PROPERTIES         HEALTH HAZARDS                 FIRE HAZARDS        SAFETY PRECAUTIONS           INCOMPATIBLE CHEMICALS OTHER HAZARDS

          Potassium      White flakes, powder,       Corrosive to                                       In case of contact with      Reacts violently with       Attacks some
          hydroxide      pellets or sticks;          respiratory system,                                eyes, rinse immediately      acids and with nitro-       metals (aluminium,
          KOH            m.p. 360 °C                 eyes and skin;                                     with water and seek          benzene and many            zinc, tin) in the
                         b.p. 1320 °C;               inhalation of dust                                 medical advice; in case      other detergents.           presence of
                         very soluble in water.      causes lung oedema.                                of contact with skin, wash   Evolves large quantity      moisture.
                                                                                                        immediately; remove          of heat when mixed
                                                                                                        contaminated clothing.       with water; store in a
                                                                                                        Wear rubber or plastic       well-sealed container.
                                                                                                        gloves and eye protection
                                                                                                        even for dilute solutions.

          Potassium      Purple crystals;            Corrosive if swallowed    Powerful oxidizing       Wear protective clothing,    Reacts violently or
          permanganate   m.p. 240 °C                 or if dust is inhaled.    agent; may ignite        eye protection and           explosively if mixed with
          KMnO4          (decomposes);               Extreme irritation of     combustible materials.   particulate respirator if    a wide variety of
                         readily soluble in water.   eyes and respiratory                               dust is produced.            inorganic and organic
                                                     tract, inhalation of dust                                                       compounds or powdered




• 162 •
                                                     may cause lung oedema.                                                          metals.

          Potassium      White deliquescent          Toxic by ingestion and                             Wear protective
          tellurite      crystals; very soluble      inhalation of dust.                                clothing.
                         in water.                   Irritation of skin and eyes.
                                                                                                                                                                                        LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




          K2TeO3

          Propan-2-ol    Colourless liquid with      Irritation of eyes and         Highly flammable;   Keep container tightly       Can react vigorously        70–85% propan-2-
          (CH3)2CHOH     alcoholic odour;            respiratory tract. May         flashpoint 112 °C   closed; keep away from       with oxidizers to form      ol in water used as
          Isopropanol    m.p. –89 °C                 affect central nervous         flammable range     ignition sources. Work in    unstable peroxides on       a disinfectant spray
                         b.p 82 °C;                  system causing                 2.3–12.7%.          fume cupboard. Wear          prolonged exposure to       remains a
                         miscible with water.        headache, dizziness,                               nitrile gloves and eye       air and light.              flammable hazard
                                                     nausea, vomiting and                               protection.                                              and should not be
                                                     coma.                                                                                                       used near ignition
                                                                                                                                                                 sources.
          Pyridine   Colourless liquid with      Affects central nervous Highly flammable;          Work with ventilation,          Reacts violently with
          C 5H 5N    characteristic odour;       system causing dizzi-      flashpoint 20 °C        local exhaust or                strong oxidants and
                     m.p. 42 °C                  ness, headache, nausea, explosive limits,          respiratory protection;         strong acids.
                     b.p. 115 °C.                shortness of breath,       1.8–12.4%.              wear gloves and
                                                 unconsciousness. May Gives off irritating or       protective clothing.
                                                 be absorbed through skin toxic fumes (or gases)
                                                 causing redness and        in a fire. Vapour/
                                                 burning sensation. In-     mixtures are explosive.
                                                 gestion causes abdominal
                                                 pain, diarrhoea, vomiting,
                                                 weakness. Repeated
                                                 exposure causes liver
                                                 and kidney effects.

          Selenium   Odourless solid in          Irritation of skin and      Combustible. Gives        Prevent dispersion of        Reacts violently with oxi-
          Se         various forms, dark         eye. Inhalation of dust     off irritating or toxic   dust. Observe strict         dants and strong acids.
                     red-brown to bluish-        may cause lung oedema.      fumes (or gases) in       hygiene. Work with local     Reacts with water at 50 °C
                     black amorphous solid       Repeated exposure may       a fire.                   exhaust. Wear protective     forming flammable
                     or red transparent          cause loss of nails,                                  gloves, clothing, and        hydrogen and selenious




• 163 •
                     crystals or metallic grey   gastrointestinal effects.                             safety spectacles.           acids. Reacts with incan-
                     to black crystals;                                                                                             descence on gentle
                     m.p. 170–217 °C                                                                                                heating with phosphorus
                     b.p. 685 °C.                                                                                                   and metals such as nickel,
                                                                                                                                    potassium, platinum,
                                                                                                                                    sodium and zinc.

          Silver     White metal, turns dark     Inhalation of high         Not combustible            Work with local exhaust.     Incompatible with
                                                                                                                                                                 ANNEX 5. CHEMICALS: HAZARDS AND PRECAUTIONS




          Ag         on exposure to ozone,       amounts of metallic        except as powder.          Wear protective gloves       acetylene, ammonium
                     hydrogen sulfide or         silver vapours may cause                              and safety spectacles or     compounds, oxalic acid
                     sulfur;                     lung damage with                                      eye protection in            and tartaric acid.
                     m.p. 962 °C                 pulmonary oedema. May                                 combination with
                     b.p. 2212 °C.               cause a grey-blue discol-                             respiratory protection for
                                                 oration of the eyes, nose,                            powder or fume.
                                                 throat and skin on long-
                                                 term or repeated
                                                 exposure (argyria).
          CHEMICAL         PHYSICAL PROPERTIES      HEALTH HAZARDS               FIRE HAZARDS             SAFETY PRECAUTIONS             INCOMPATIBLE CHEMICALS OTHER HAZARDS

          Silver nitrate   White crystals;          May cause severe         Not combustible but          Prevent dispersion of          Ammoniacal solutions
          AgNO3            m.p. 212 °C              irritation and burns to  enhances combustion          dust. Observe strict           can precipitate explosive
                           b.p. 444 °C;             eyes and skin. Corrosive of other substances.         hygiene. Wear protective       silver nitrite in the
                           soluble in water.        by ingestion. May cause                               rubber or plastic gloves,      presence of base or
                                                    a red-blue discoloration                              and face shield or eye         glucose. Can form
                                                    of the skin on long-term                              protection in combination      explosive products with
                                                    or repeated exposure                                  with respiratory protection.   ethanol and may cause
                                                    (argyria).                                            In case of contact with        explosive polymerization
                                                                                                          eyes, rinse with water         with acrylonitrile. May
                                                                                                          and seek medical advice.       cause ignition of explosion
                                                                                                                                         if mixed with charcoal,
                                                                                                                                         magnesium, phosphorus
                                                                                                                                         or sulfur.

          Sodium azide     Colourless crystalline   Very toxic by ingestion,     Decomposes               In case of contact with        Explosive reactions with
          N3Na             solid;                   inhalation and skin          explosively when         skin, wash immediately.        bromine, carbon disulfide




• 164 •
                           m.p. 300 °C;             contact; may cause           heated above its melt-   Do not inhale dust.            or chromyl chloride. Solid
                           soluble in water.        burns. Dust and              ing point. Gives off     Wear rubber or plastic         reacts with heavy metals
                                                    solution irritate eyes and   toxic fumes when         gloves and eye                 including copper, lead and
                                                    skin; may be absorbed        heated; do not use       protection.                    mercury to form explosive
                                                                                                                                                                                LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




                                                    through skin.                water to extinguish                                     metal azide salts. On
                                                                                 fires.                                                  contact with acid, develops
                                                                                                                                         highly toxic and explosive
                                                                                                                                         gas.

          Sodium           Colourless, white        Toxic by ingestion and                                Wear protective clothing.      Oxidizing agents.
          biselenite       crystalline powder;      inhalation of dust;
          NaHSeO3          soluble in water.        possible danger of
                                                    cumulative effects.
                                                    Experimental teratogen.
                                                    Prolonged skin contact
                                                    may cause dermatitis.
          Sodium cyanide White crystalline        Extremely toxic by         May give off toxic      Do not inhale dust; use       Liberates extremely        Treat spillage of
          NaCN           powder with almond       ingestion, inhalation      fumes in a fire.        respiratory protection.       toxic hydrogen cyanide     solutions with
                         odour;                   and skin contact;                                  Avoid eye and skin contact;   (HCN) gas on contact       bleaching powder
                         m.p. 563 °C              severely irritating to                             in case of contact with       with acids or with water   (sodium hypo-
                         b.p. 1496 °C;            eyes. May be absorbed                              skin, wash immediately        containing dissolved       chlorite) and leave
                         very soluble in water.   through skin. Repeated                             with water and remove         carbon dioxide. Can        for 24 h. Sweep up
                                                  exposure may affect                                contaminated clothing.        form explosive mixtures    solid spills carefully
                                                  thyroid.                                           Wear chemical-grade           with nitrites.             and add to water
                                                                                                     goggles and rubber or                                    containing
                                                                                                     plastic gloves. Keep in a                                bleaching powder;
                                                                                                     securely locked, ventilated                              leave for 24 h
                                                                                                     store.                                                   before discarding.
                                                                                                                                                              Keep cyanide anti-
                                                                                                                                                              dote kit available in
                                                                                                                                                              the laboratory.

          Sodium          Colourless flakes,      Solid and concentrated     Not combustible.        In case of contact with       Evolves large quantity   Store in well-sealed
          hydroxide       powder, pellets or      solute. Inhalation of      Contact with moisture   eyes rinse immediately        of heat when mixed with container in dry




• 165 •
          NaOH            sticks;                 dust causes damage to      or water may generate   and seek medical advice;      water. Reacts vigorously place.
                          m.p. 318 °C             respiratory tract, lung    sufficient heat to      in case of contact with       with chloroform-
                          b.p. 1390 °C;           oedema. Corrosive by       ignite combustible      skin wash immediately         methanol mixtures and
                          soluble in water.       ingestion. Dilute          substances.             with water, remove            with strong acids.
                                                  solutions irritating to                            contaminated clothing.
                                                  eyes or may cause severe                           Wear rubber or plastic
                                                  damage if eye contact is                           gloves and eye protection
                                                                                                                                                                                       ANNEX 5. CHEMICALS: HAZARDS AND PRECAUTIONS




                                                  prolonged.                                         even with dilute solutions.
          CHEMICAL        PHYSICAL PROPERTIES     HEALTH HAZARDS            FIRE HAZARDS            SAFETY PRECAUTIONS          INCOMPATIBLE CHEMICALS OTHER HAZARDS

          Sodium          Colourless or pale      Corrosive to eyes and     Strong oxidant. May     In case of contact with    Liberates highly toxic       Gradually loses
          hypochlorite    yellow solution with    skin; corrosive by        give off toxic fumes    eyes, rinse immediately    gas in contact with acids.   chlorine during
          solution        chlorine odour;         ingestion and to          in a fire.              with water and seek        Can react vigorously         storage; dilute
          (10–14%         miscible with water.    respiratory tract;                                medical advice; in case of with combustible and         solutions used as
          available                               inhalation may cause                              contact with skin, wash    reducing compounds.          disinfectant rapidly
          chlorine)                               lung oedema. Repeated                             immediately. Do not inhale May react with nitrogen      deteriorate. Store
          NaOCl                                   exposure may cause                                vapour; use respiratory    compounds to form            away from acids in
                                                  skin sensitization.                               protection. Work in well- explosive N-chloro-           a dark, cool, well-
                                                                                                    ventilated area. Wear      compounds; may react         ventilated area.
                                                                                                    rubber or plastic gloves   violently with methanol.
                                                                                                    and chemical-grade eye
                                                                                                    protection.

          Sulfuric acid   Colourless, odourless   Concentrated solution     May give off toxic      In case of contact with     Is a powerful oxidizing  Localized boiling
          H2SO4           viscous liquid;         (15%) corrosive, causes   fumes in a fire. Not    eyes rinse immediately      desiccant and reacts     may occur if
                          m.p. 10°C               severe burns; mist and    combustible. Many       and seek medical advice;    violently with many      concentrated acid




• 166 •
                          b.p. (decomposes)       vapour highly corrosive   reactions may cause     in case of contact with     reagents including       is added to water.
                          340 °C.                 by inhalation; dilute     fire or explosion.      skin wash immediately       organic nitro compounds,
                                                  solutions irritating to   Dilution with water     remove contaminated         potassium permanganate,
                                                  eyes and skin; cause      generates heat and      clothing. Wear nitrile      alkali metals and per-
                                                                                                                                                                                   LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




                                                  burns and dermatitis.     spattering or boiling   gloves, eye and face        chlorates, combustible
                                                                            may occur. Always       protection. No contact      materials, oxidizers,
                                                                            add acid to water,      with flammable              amines, bases, water,
                                                                            never add water to      substances.                 excess heat and most
                                                                            acid.                                               metals.
          Tetrahydrofuran Colourless liquid, with       Central nervous system        Highly flammable;         Work with ventilation,       Reacts violently with
          C 4H 8O          characteristic odour;        depressant causing            may form explosive        local exhaust or             strong oxidants, strong
          Diethylene oxide m.p. –108.5 °C               narcosis. Eye, skin and       peroxides;                respiratory protection,      bases and some metal
          Tetramethylene b.p. 66 °C.                    respiratory irritation.       flashpoint –14 °C.        protective gloves, safety    halide, causing fire and
          oxide                                                                       Water may be ineffect-    spectacles.                  explosion hazard. Attacks
                                                                                      ive to fight fires                                     some forms of plastics,
                                                                                      involving tetrahydro-                                  rubber and coatings.
                                                                                      furan, but it can be                                   Tetrahydrofuran may
                                                                                      used to cool fire-                                     polymerize in the presence
                                                                                      exposed containers.                                    of cationic initiators.
                                                                                                                                             Refluxing with calcium
                                                                                                                                             hydroxide can cause
                                                                                                                                             explosions.

          Thallium acetate White deliquescent           Extremely toxic by                                      Keep container tightly
          TlC2H3O2         crystals;                    ingestion with possible                                 closed. Work in fume
                           m.p. 110 °C;                 cumulative effects.                                     cupboard, hood or
                           very soluble in water.       Affects nervous and                                     with exhaust ventilation.




• 167 •
                                                        cardiovascular systems.                                 Wear protective clothing
                                                        Harmful through eye and                                 including dust respirator,
                                                        skin contact.                                           chemical-grade goggles,
                                                                                                                rubber or plastic gloves,
                                                                                                                eye protection.

          o-Tolidine         Colourless crystals;       Harmful by contact with       Combustible. Gives        Avoid contact; wear eye      Oxidizing agents.
                                                                                                                                                                          ANNEX 5. CHEMICALS: HAZARDS AND PRECAUTIONS




          (C6H3-(3CH3)-      m.p. 131 °C                skin or ingestion. Dust       off irritating or toxic   protection and gloves.
          (4NH2))2           b.p. 200 °C;               irritates respiratory tract   fumes (or gases) in
          3,3'-Dimethyl-     poorly soluble in water.   and eyes. Probably a          a fire.
          (1,1'-biphenyl)-                              human carcinogen.
          4,4'-diamine
          CHEMICAL          PHYSICAL PROPERTIES          HEALTH HAZARDS             FIRE HAZARDS            SAFETY PRECAUTIONS           INCOMPATIBLE CHEMICALS OTHER HAZARDS

          Toluene           Colourless liquid with       Central nervous            Highly flammable;       Keep container tightly      Can react with strong
          C 7H 8            characteristic odour;        system depressant.         vapour may cause        closed; keep away from      acids, alkalis and
          Methylbenzene     m.p. –95 °C                  Irritation of eyes,        flash fire;             ignition sources; earth/    oxidizers.
                            b.p. 111 °C;                 mucous membranes,          flashpoint 4 °C         (ground) containers to
                            not miscible with water.     skin. Repeated exposure    flammable range         prevent static electrical
                                                         may cause toxicity in      1.4–7%.                 discharge. Do not inhale
                                                         human reproduction or      Extinguishing media     vapour; use respiratory
                                                         development.               for a small fire: dry   protection. Work in fume
                                                                                    chemicals, carbon       cupboard or well-ventilated
                                                                                    dioxide, foam, water    area. Wear nitrile gloves.
                                                                                    fog or inert gas
                                                                                    (nitrogen).

          Trichloroacetic   White hygroscopic            Corrosive; causes          Not combustible. May    Avoid contact with eyes      Violent reaction with      Store in a dry place.
          acid              crystals with pungent        severe burns to eyes,      give off toxic fumes    and skin; wear rubber or     copper/dimethyl            Concentrated
          CCl3COOH          odour;                       skin, respiratory tract.   in fire.                plastic gloves and           sulfoxide mixtures and     aqueous solutions




• 168 •
                            m.p. 58 °C                                                                      chemical-grade goggles       on contact with bases,     may decompose
                            b.p. 197.5 °C;                                                                  or face shield in            strong oxidizing agents    violently.
                            soluble in water, ethanol,                                                      combination with             and metals such as iron,
                            diethylether.                                                                   respiratory protection. In   zinc, aluminium.
                                                                                                                                                                                            LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL




                                                                                                            case of contact with eyes,
                                                                                                            rinse immediately and
                                                                                                            seek medical advice.
          Trichloro-      Colourless liquid,       Irritation of eyes, skin; Combustible under        Work with ventilation,      On contact with hot
          ethylene        characteristic odour;    prolonged exposure        specific conditions.     local exhaust. Wear         surfaces or flames,
          CHClCCl2        m.p. –73 °C              may cause dermatitis                               gloves, safety spectacles   decomposes forming
                          b.p. 87 °C.              and affect the central                             or other eye protection     toxic and corrosive gases
                                                   nervous system resulting                           in combination with         (phosgene, hydrogen
                                                   in loss of memory. May                             respiratory protection.     chloride). Decomposes
                                                   affect liver and kidneys.                                                      on contact with strong
                                                   Probably a human                                                               alkali producing dichloro-
                                                   carcinogen.                                                                    acetylene; reacts violently
                                                                                                                                  with metal powders such
                                                                                                                                  as aluminium, barium,
                                                                                                                                  magnesium and titanium;
                                                                                                                                  slowly decomposed by
                                                                                                                                  light in the presence of
                                                                                                                                  moisture, with formation
                                                                                                                                  of hydrochloric acid.

          Xylene (mixed   Colourless liquid with   May affect central          Flammable liquid;      Avoid contact with eyes.                                  May contain




• 169 •
          isomers)        aromatic odour;          nervous system              flashpoint 27–32 °C.   Wear nitrile gloves and                                   ethylbenzene as an
          C6H4(CH3)2      m.p. –95 to –13 °C       resulting in headache,                             eye protection. Keep                                      impurity.
          Dimethyl-       b.p. 136–145 °C;         dizziness, fatigue and                             container tightly closed;                                 Ethylbenzene is a
          benzene         insoluble in water.      nausea. Liquid and                                 keep away from ignition                                   possible human
                                                   vapour irritate eyes, skin,                        sources.                                                  carcinogen.
                                                   mucous membranes,
                                                   respiratory tract. Harmful
                                                   if ingested. Prolonged
                                                                                                                                                                                     ANNEX 5. CHEMICALS: HAZARDS AND PRECAUTIONS




                                                   skin contact may defat
                                                   the skin. Non-specific
                                                   neurological impairment.
                                                   Exposure may enhance
                                                   hearing damage caused
                                                   by exposure to noise.
                                                   Animal tests suggest
                                                   toxicity to human repro-
                                                   duction or development.
Index



abrasions 79                                            alcohol-based hand rubs 87–88, 90
access                                                  alcohols 87–88
    animal facilities 29, 30, 31                        allergy, latex 66
    laboratory 9–10, 21, 26                             2-amino-ethanol 154
accidents 11                                            ammonia solutions 148
    equipment-related 144                               ammonium bicarbonate 89
    see also first aid; injuries; spills                ampoules of infectious materials
acetaldehyde 146                                            opening 74
acetic acid 146                                             storage 74
acetic anhydride 146                                    anaerobic jars/incubators 142, 144
acetone 147                                             aniline 148
acetonitrile 147                                        animal facilities 10, 28–32
acetylene 147                                               Biosafety Level 1: 29
acrolein 148                                                Biosafety Level 2: 29–30
aerosols                                                    Biosafety Level 3: 30–31
    activities generating 51                                Biosafety Level 4: 31–32
    biological safety cabinets and 15, 51                   containment levels 28
    pipetting hazards 63                                    invertebrates 32
    release of potentially infectious 79                animal facility Biosafety Levels (ABSL) 28
    safety equipment and 61                             animals
air, exhaust see exhaust air                                disposal of carcasses 30
air filters see high-efficiency particulate air             non-experimental 10, 29
        (HEPA) filters                                      transgenic and knock-out 102–103
airflow, directional                                    anterooms 21, 30, 31
    alarms 21, 60                                       antimicrobial 82
    animal facilities 29, 30, 31                        antiseptics 82, 87, 88
    biological safety cabinets 53, 56                   aprons 64, 65
    Biosafety Level 3: 21                               arthropods
    Biosafety Level 4: 26–27                                control of verminous 12, 29
air systems                                                 housing facilities 32
    biological safety cabinets 51–52, 53–54,            audit 36–37
        56–57                                           auramine 148
    protective suit 26                                  autoclaves 63, 90–92
    see also ventilation systems                            animal facilities 30, 31
airlocks 26, 27, 31                                         availability 13, 16, 22, 27
alarms 21, 60                                               double-door pass-through 26, 27


                                                  • 170 •
                                               INDEX



   fuel-heated pressure cooker 91                      biosafety
   gravity displacement 90, 91                            management 12
   loading 91                                             versus laboratory biosecurity 47
   pre-vacuum 91                                       Biosafety Collaborating Centres, WHO
   precautions for use 92                                     140
   validation 16                                       biosafety committee 118
autoclaving 18, 90–92                                  Biosafety Level 1: 1, 3, 9–19
azides 108, 164                                           animal facilities 29
                                                          laboratory design 12–14
backflow prevention 14, 22                                laboratory safety survey form 38–40
basic laboratory (Biosafety Levels 1 and 2)               health and medical surveillance 16
       1, 9–19                                            see also basic laboratory
   chemical, fire, electrical, radiation and           Biosafety Level 2: 1, 3, 9–19
       equipment safety 19                                animal facilities 29–30
   code of practice 9–12                                  laboratory design 12–14, 15
   design and facilities 12–14, 15                        laboratory safety survey form 41–42
   equipment 13–16                                        health and medical surveillance 16
   health and medical surveillance 16                     see also basic laboratory
   safety survey forms 38–42                           Biosafety Level 3: 1, 3, 20–23
   training 16–17                                         animal facilities 30–31
   waste handling 17–19                                   laboratory design 21–22
bedding, animal 30, 31                                    laboratory safety survey form 43
bench tops 12                                             see also containment laboratory
benzene 149                                            Biosafety Level 4: 1, 3, 25–27
benzidine 149                                             animal facilities 31–32
biocide 82                                                laboratory design 25–27
biohazard warning sign 9, 10, 20, 29                      see also maximum containment
biological expression systems 102                             laboratory
biological safety cabinets (BSCs) 51–60, 62            biosafety levels 1
   air connections 56–57                                  animal facility (ABSL) 28
   animal facilities 30                                   facility requirements 3
   certification 59                                       microbiological risk groups and 1–3
   class I 51–53, 55                                   biosafety officer 17, 117–118
   class II 52–54, 55                                  biosecurity 47–48
       type A1 53–54                                   1,1’-biphenyl-4,4’-diamine” 149
       types A2, B1 and B2 54, 55                      bleach (sodium hypochlorite) 84–85, 89,
   class III 55, 56                                           166
       laboratory 25–27                                blenders 63–64, 73
   decontamination 59, 89                              blood, standard precautions 74–76
   exhaust air see under exhaust air                   body fluids, standard precautions 74–76
   location 22, 57                                     boiling 90
   operation and maintenance 58                        bottles, screw-capped 16, 63
   prion contamination 77                              bromine 149
   required use 15, 21, 22                             BSCs see biological safety cabinets
   safe use 57–60, 70–71                               building maintenance services 119
   selection 52, 57                                    Bunsen burners 70, 71

                                               • 171 •
                              LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



cages                                               refrigerators and freezers 73
    animal 30, 31                                clothing, protective see personal protective
    flying insects 32                                   equipment/clothing
calcium hypochlorite 84                          coats, laboratory 64, 65
carbon dioxide, solid (dry ice) 150              codes of practice
carbon tetrachloride 150                            Biosafety Level 1 and 2: 9–12
4,4'-carbonoimidoylbis                              Biosafety Level 3: 20–21
        (N,N-dimethylbenzenamine) 148               Biosafety Level 4: 25
ceilings 12, 21                                  commissioning, laboratory/facility 33–35
centrifuges 72–73, 142                           commissioning agent 33–34
    breakage of tubes in 79–80                   communication facilities 25
    containment accessories 22                   contact lenses 11
    improper use 144                             containers
certification                                       broken 79
    biological safety cabinets 59                   contaminated waste 18–19
    laboratory/facility 36–37                       leakproof 62
checklist, safety 125–131                           sharps disposal 18, 62
chemical germicides 82, 83–88                       specimen 69, 75, 95
chemicals (hazardous) 19, 107–109                containment, primary
    biological safety cabinets 57                at Biosafety Level 4 25–26
    explosive 108, 144                           containment laboratory (Biosafety Level 3)
    incompatible, general rules 107, 108                1, 3, 20–23
    routes of exposure 107                          code of practice 20–21
    safety checklist 130–131                        design and facilities 21–22, 23
    specific 145–169                                equipment 22
    spills 108–109                                  health and medical surveillance 22–23,
    storage 107                                         24
    toxic effects 107–108                           safety survey form 43
children 10                                      containment levels, animal facility 28
chilling facilities, arthropods 32                      see also biosafety levels
chloramines 84, 85                               contaminated liquids/effluents 11, 27
chlorine 84–85, 150                              contaminated materials see infectious
chlorine dioxide 85–86, 151                             materials
chlorine-releasing compounds 84–85               contingency plans 78
chloroform 151                                   copper 152
chromic acid 151                                 cosmetics 11
chromium VI oxide 151                            coveralls 64, 65
circuit-breakers 111                             Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) 76
class III cabinet laboratory 25–26               culture stirrers, shakers, agitators 143
    controlled air system 26–27                  cuts 79
clean-air work stations 51                       cyanogen bromide 152
clean-up procedure, spills 95–97                 cytochalasin 152
cleaning
    biological safety cabinets 59                decontamination
    domestic 119                                    biological safety cabinets 59, 89
    laboratory materials 83                         blood/body fluids 76

                                           • 172 •
                                              INDEX



   definition 82                                      electricity supply 14, 27
   effluents 11, 27                                   emergencies 78–81
   hand 90                                               Biosafety level 4: 25, 27
   local environmental 88–89                             contingency plans 78
   prion-contaminated materials 77                       laboratory procedures 79–81
   waste materials 18, 22                             emergency equipment 81
   see also cleaning; disinfection                    emergency services 80–81
desiccators 142                                       engineering services 119
design, laboratory                                    equipment
   Biosafety Level 1 and 2: 12–14, 15                    basic laboratory 14–16
   Biosafety Level 3: 21–22, 23                          containment laboratory 22
   Biosafety Level 4: 25–27                              emergency 81
   commissioning requirements and 33                     hazards 141–144
diethyl ether 153                                        personal protective see personal
diethylene dioxide 154                                       protective equipment/clothing
diethylene oxide 167                                     safety 19, 61–66
3,3'-dimethyl-(1,1'-biphenyl)-4,4'-diamine                   checklist 130
       167                                            Escherichia coli K12 102
dimethylamine 153                                     ethanol (ethyl alcohol) 87–88, 154
dimethylbenzene 169                                   ethanolamine 154
2,4-dinitrophenyl-hydrazine 153                       ethers 108
dioxane 154                                           excreta, standard precautions 74–76
disasters, natural 78, 80                             exhaust air
disinfectants 82, 83–88                                  animal facilities 30
disinfection 82–93                                       biological safety cabinets 22, 26, 51, 52–
   biological safety cabinets 59                             54, 56, 57
   chemical 83–88                                        containment laboratory 21, 22
   cleaning prior to 82, 83                              maximum containment laboratory 26–
   definition 82                                             27
   heat 90–92                                         explosive chemicals 108, 144
   spills 95–97                                       expression systems, biological 102
   waste materials 19                                 expression vectors 102
   see also decontamination; sterilization            eye protection 11, 64–65, 71
dispersal of infectious materials, avoiding
       70                                             face protection 11, 64–65
doors                                                 face shields (visors) 11, 65
   animal facilities 29                               facilities, laboratory
   laboratory 13, 21, 26                                  Biosafety Level 1 and 2: 12–14
drains, containment 27                                    Biosafety Level 3: 21–22, 23
drinking 11, 13, 30                                       Biosafety Level 4: 25–27
                                                          biosafety level designations 1
earth-fault-interrupters 111                          films, for microscopy 75
eating 11, 13, 30, 71                                 fire extinguishers 110–111
effluents, contaminated 11, 27                        fires 19, 110–111
electrical hazards 19, 111, 144                           causes 110, 144
    safety checklist 128                                  emergency procedures 80

                                              • 173 •
                               LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



    prevention and protection checklist             checklist 129
        127                                         containment laboratory 22–23, 24
first aid 13, 138                               hearing protection 111
first-aid box 138                               heat
flame photometer 144                                disinfection and sterilization 90–92
flames, open 59, 70                                 dry 90
flammable liquid storage 128                        moist 90
floors 12, 21                                   heating, ventilation and air-conditioning
food 11                                                 (HVAC) system 21
footwear 11, 20, 25, 65                             safety checklist 126
formaldehyde 86, 89, 155                        HEPA filters see high-efficiency particulate
formalin 86, 89                                         air filters
freeze-dryers 143                               high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA)
freezers 73–74                                  filters
fumigation 89                                       animal facilities 30
furniture, laboratory 12                            biological safety cabinets 51, 53, 56
                                                    Biosafety Level 3: 21, 22
gas(es)                                             Biosafety Level 4: 26, 27
   compressed and liquefied 109, 128                prion-contaminated 77
   supply to laboratory 14                      homogenizers 63–64, 73, 142
gene transfer 101, 102                          horizontal and vertical outflow cabinets 51
genetic engineering 101                         1-hydrazino-2,4-dinitrobenzene 153
genetically modified organisms (GMOs)           hydrochloric acid 155
      101–104                                   hydrogen chloride 155
   further considerations 104                   peroxide 88, 89, 156
   risk assessments 103–104                     hydrogen sulfide 156
   types 102–103
germicides, chemical 82, 83–88                  illumination see lighting
glass 75                                        immunization, staff 139
   handling broken 79, 80, 95                   incidents see accidents; spills
   precautions in use 71, 75                    incineration 19, 92–93
gloves 10, 60, 65, 66                           incinerators 31, 92
glutaraldehyde 86, 155                          infectious materials
GMOs see genetically modified organisms             autoclaving and reuse 18
goggles 64–65                                       avoiding dispersal 70
good microbiological technique (GMT)                contact with skin and eyes 71
      9–12, 69–77                                   decontamination see decontamination
gowns 64, 65                                        disposal 18–19, 22
                                                    ingestion 71, 79
hand decontamination 90                             safety checklist 130
hand rubs, alcohol-based 87–88, 90                  spills 11, 79, 95–97
hand washing 10, 66, 90                         infective microorganisms, risk groups see
   animal facility staff 30                            risk groups, microbiological
   facilities 13, 21, 30                        ingestion of infectious material 71, 79
health and medical surveillance                 injuries
   basic laboratory 16                              animal facility staff 30

                                          • 174 •
                                             INDEX



   emergency procedures 79                           maintenance personnel 119
   prevention 71–72                                  maximum containment laboratory
inoculation, accidental 71–72                              (Biosafety Level 4) 1, 3, 25–27
insects, flying 32                                      code of practice 25
inspection, laboratory 36–37                            design and facilities 25–27
International Air Transport Association              medical contact card 22–23, 24
       (IATA) 94                                     medical surveillance see health and medical
International Civil Aviation Organization                  surveillance
       (ICAO) 94                                     mercury 157
international transport regulations 94–95            methanol 157
invertebrates 32                                     methylbenzene 168
iodine 88, 156                                       microbicide 82–83
iodophores 88                                        microbiological risk assessment see risk
isolator cages 30, 31                                      assessment, microbiological
isolators, negative-pressure flexible-film           microincinerators 62, 64
       61, 62                                        microscopy, films and smears for 75
isopropanol (isopropyl alcohol) 87, 162              mites 32

knock-out animals 102–103                            naphthylamine 157
                                                     natural disasters 78, 80
labelling, specimen 74–75                            needle-stick injuries, avoiding 71–72
laboratory                                           needles, hypodermic 11, 75, 141–142
    biosafety levels see biosafety levels               disposal 18
    biosecurity 47–48                                negative-pressure flexible-film isolators
    certification 36–37                                     61, 62
    commissioning 33–35                              ninhydrin 158
    facilities see facilities, laboratory            nitric acid 158
    premises, safety checklist 125                   nitrobenzene 158
    safety survey forms 38–43                        noise 111
    services, safety checklist 126–127
    techniques 69–77                                 osmium tetroxide 159
    working areas 11                                 outbreaks, diseases of unknown etiology 8
    see also basic laboratory; containment           oxalic acid 159
        laboratory; maximum containment              oxygen 159
        laboratory
laboratory director 12, 117                          packaging systems 95, 96
laboratory supervisors 12, 117                       paraformaldehyde 86, 89
    training role 17, 120                            peracids 88
latex allergy 66                                     perchloric acid 108, 160
lighting 12, 14, 126                                 personal protective equipment/clothing
loops see transfer loops                                   64–66
lyophilized infectious materials, opening               animal facility 30, 31
        ampoules 74                                     basic laboratory 10–11
lyophilizers 143                                        biological safety cabinet 60
                                                        checklist 129
                                                        containment laboratory 20–21

                                             • 175 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



   maximum containment laboratory 25,             safety checklist 130–131
       26                                         work-bench area 113–114
   prions 77                                   radiation area 113
personnel                                      radiation hazard symbol 113, 114
   biosafety management 12                     radioactive waste 114
   biosecurity issues 47                       radionuclides
   facilities, safety checklist 126               biological safety cabinets 57
   health and medical surveillance see            safe working practices 112–113
       health and medical surveillance            substitution 113
   immunization 139                            recombinant DNA technology 101–104
   personal items/clothing 13                  refrigerators 73–74, 144
   responsibility for own safety 117           respirators (respiratory protective
   support 119                                        equipment) 21, 65–66
   training see training                       rest facilities 13
phenol 160                                     risk assessment, microbiological 2, 7–8
phenolic compounds 86–87                          animal facilities 28–29
N-phenyl-α-naphthylamine 157                      genetically modified organisms 103–
N-phenyl-β-naphthylamine 157                          104
phosphoric acid 161                            risk groups, microbiological
phosphorus pentoxide 161                          basic laboratories 9
picric acid/picrates 108, 161                     biosafety levels and 2–3
pipettes 16, 70                                   classification 1–2
pipetting 70                                   rodent control 12, 29
   aids 15, 62, 63, 70
   mouth 11, 63                                safety checklist 125–131
plants, transgenic 101, 103                    safety equipment see equipment, safety
plasmid pUC18 102                              sanitation facilities 126
poliovirus-susceptible mice 102–103            screens, arthropod-proof 32
potassium hydroxide 162                        screw-capped bottles 16, 63
potassium permanganate 162                     security precautions 14, 127
potassium tellurite 162                        selenium 163
precleaning 82, 83                             serum, separation 72
primary containment 25–26                      shakers 63–64, 73
primates, non-human 29                         sharps 18
prions 76–77                                       animal facilities 30
product protection 51, 53                          avoiding injuries 66, 71–72, 75
propan-2-ol (2-propanol) 87, 162                   disposal containers 18, 62
protective suit 26                             shoes see footwear
   see also suit laboratory                    showers 26, 30
pyridine 163                                   silver 163
                                               silver nitrate 164
quaternary ammonium compounds 87               skin
                                                   contact 71
radiation, ionizing 19, 111–114                    puncture wounds, cuts and abrasions
   harmful effects 111                                 79
   principles of protection 112–113                see also injuries

                                         • 176 •
                                            INDEX



smears, for microscopy 75                              facilities, checklist 125
smoking 11, 30                                         flammable liquids 128
soda ash (sodium carbonate) 109                        space, laboratory 12
sodium azide 164                                    suit, protective 26
sodium bicarbonate 109                              suit laboratory 26
sodium biselenite 164                                  controlled air system 26–27
sodium cyanide 165                                  sulfuric acid 166
sodium dichloroisocyanurate (NaDCC)                 support staff 119
        84, 85                                      survey, laboratory safety 36–37
sodium hydroxide 165                                   forms 38–43
sodium hypochlorite (bleach) 84–85, 89,             syringes 11, 18
        166
sonicators 63–64, 73, 75, 142                       tetrahydrofuran 167
spatter shield 62                                   tetramethylene oxide 167
specimens 69                                        thallium acetate 167
   collection 74–75                                 ticks 32
   containers 69, 75, 95                            tissue grinders 73, 142
   labelling 74–75                                  tissues
   with limited information 8                           prion-containing 77
   opening packages 69                                  standard precautions 75
   opening tubes and sampling contents              o-tolidine 167
        75                                          toluene 168
   receipt 69                                       total exhaust cabinet 57
   standard precautions 74–75                       training 120–121
   transport 69, 74–75                                  animal facility workers 30, 31
   triple packaging system 95, 96                       biological safety cabinet use 60
spectacles, safety 64–65                                biosecurity 47
spills                                                  laboratory workers 16–17
   in biological safety cabinets 59                 transfer loops
   blood 76                                             disposable 15, 62, 64
   chemical 108–109                                     microincinerators 62, 64
   infectious materials 11, 79, 95–97                   safe use 70
sporocide 83                                        transgenic animals 102–103
staff see personnel                                 transgenic plants 101, 103
standard precautions 74–76                          transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
sterilization 27, 82–93                                     (TSEs) 76
   cleaning prior to 82, 83                         transport 11, 94–97
   definition 83                                        infectious waste 18–19, 22
   heat 90–92                                           international regulations 94–95
   prion-contaminated materials 77                      specimens 69, 74–75
   see also decontamination; disinfection               triple packaging system 95, 96
storage                                             trichloroacetic acid 168
   ampoules of infectious materials 74              trichloroethylene 169
   chemicals 108                                    triclosan 87
   compressed and liquefied gases 109,              2,4,6-trinitrophenol (picric acid) 108, 161
        128                                         triple packaging systems 95, 96

                                            • 177 •
                             LABORATORY BIOSAFETY MANUAL



tubes                                          walls 12, 21
   breakage in centrifuges 79–80               warranty periods, laboratory/facility 33
   screw-capped 16                             waste 17–19
two-person rule 25, 31                            animal facilities 30, 31
                                                  Biosafety Level 4: 27
ultra-centrifuges 142                             decontamination 18, 22
ultrasonic cleaners 142                           disposal 18–19, 22, 93
ultraviolet lights 58                             invertebrate facilities 32
United Nations Committee of Experts on            prion-contaminated 77
      the Transport of Dangerous Goods            radioactive 114
      (UNCETDG) 94                             water baths 143
universal precautions 74–76                    water supply 14, 22
                                               windows
vacuum flasks 144                                 animal facilities 29, 31
vacuum lines 22, 63                               invertebrate facilities 32
validation, equipment 16                          laboratory 11, 14, 21
vectors 102                                    women of childbearing age 16, 129
ventilation systems                            work surfaces
   animal facilities 29, 30, 31                   animal facilities 29
   basic laboratory 14                            laboratory 11, 12
   checklist 126                               working areas, laboratory 11
   containment laboratory 21                   World Health Organization (WHO)
   maximum containment laboratory 26–             Biosafety Collaborating Centres 140
       27                                         Biosafety programme 25
viral vectors 102
                                               xylene 169




                                         • 178 •
