                                                                                               Ref. Ares(2014)968076 - 28/03/2014


                                EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                HEALTH AND CONSUMERS DIRECTORATE-GENERAL

                                Public Health and Risk Assessment
                                Medicinal Product – quality, safety and efficacy




                                                                                          Brussels, 16 August 2013


                                                         EudraLex

                     The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union

                                                         Volume 4
                                                    EU Guidelines for
                                         Good Manufacturing Practice for
                             Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use

                                                       Part 1
                                                 Chapter 2: Personnel




    Legal basis for publishing the detailed guidelines: Article 47 of Directive 2001/83/EC on
    the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use and Article 51 of Directive
    2001/82/EC on the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products. This document
    provides guidance for the interpretation of the principles and guidelines of good
    manufacturing practice (GMP) for medicinal products as laid down in Directive 2003/94/EC
    for medicinal products for human use and Directive 91/412/EEC for veterinary use.

    Status of the document: Revisiona

    Reasons for changes: Changes have been made in order to integrate the principles of
    “Pharmaceutical Quality System” as described in the ICH Q10 tripartite guideline. A section
    has been added on consultants

    Deadline for coming into operation: 16 February 2014




Commission Européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel – Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11




                                                               1
    a
        On 26 March 2014 minor change to references to in paragraph 2.5 to other paragraphs of Chapter 2.
Principle

The correct manufacture of medicinal products relies upon people. For this reason there must
be sufficient qualified personnel to carry out all the tasks which are the responsibility of the
manufacturer. Individual responsibilities should be clearly understood by the individuals and
recorded. All personnel should be aware of the principles of Good Manufacturing Practice
that affect them and receive initial and continuing training, including hygiene instructions,
relevant to their needs.

General

2.1 The manufacturer should have an adequate number of personnel with the necessary
qualifications and practical experience. Senior management should determine and provide
adequate and appropriate resources (human, financial, materials, facilities and equipment) to
implement and maintain the quality management system and continually improve its
effectiveness. The responsibilities placed on any one individual should not be so extensive as
to present any risk to quality.

2.2 The manufacturer must have an organisation chart in which the relationships between the
heads of Production, Quality Control and where applicable Head of Quality Assurance or
Quality Unit referred to in point 2.5 and the position of the Qualified Person(s) are clearly
shown in the managerial hierarchy.

2.3 People in responsible positions should have specific duties recorded in written job
descriptions and adequate authority to carry out their responsibilities. Their duties may be
delegated to designated deputies of a satisfactory qualification level. There should be no gaps
or unexplained overlaps in the responsibilities of those personnel concerned with the
application of Good Manufacturing Practice.

2.4 Senior management has the ultimate responsibility to ensure an effective quality
management system is in place to achieve the quality objectives, and, that roles,
responsibilities, and authorities are defined, communicated and implemented throughout the
organisation. Senior management should establish a quality policy that describes the overall
intentions and direction of the company related to quality and should ensure continuing
suitability and effectiveness of the quality management system and GMP compliance through
participation in management review.

Key Personnel

2.5 Senior Management should appoint Key Management Personnel including the head of
Production, the head of Quality Control, and if at least one of these persons is not responsible
for the duties described in Article 51 of Directive 2001/83/EC1, an adequate number, but at
least one, Qualified Person(s) designated for the purpose. Normally, key posts should be
occupied by full-time personnel. The heads of Production and Quality Control must be
independent from each other. In large organisations, it may be necessary to delegate some of
the functions listed in 2.7, 2.8 and 2.9. Additionally depending on the size and organisational
structure of the company, a separate Head of Quality Assurance or Head of the Quality Unit
may be appointed. Where such a function exists usually some of the responsibilities described
in 2.7, 2.8 and 2.9 are shared with the Head of Quality Control and Head of Production and


1
    Article 55 of Directive 2001/82/EC
                                               2
senior management should therefore take care that roles, responsibilities, and authorities are
defined.

2.6 The duties of the Qualified Person(s) are described in Article 51 of Directive 2001/83/EC,
and can be summarised as follows:

a) for medicinal products manufactured within the European Union, a Qualified Person must
ensure that each batch has been manufactured and checked in compliance with the laws in
force in that Member State and in accordance with the requirements of the marketing
authorisation2;

(b) in the case of medicinal products coming from third countries, irrespective of whether the
product has been manufactured in the European Union a Qualified Person must ensure that
each production batch has undergone in a Member State a full qualitative analysis, a
quantitative analysis of at least all the active substances and all the other tests or checks
necessary to ensure the quality of medicinal products in accordance with the requirements of
the marketing authorisation. The Qualified Person must certify in a register or equivalent
document, as operations are carried out and before any release, that each production batch
satisfies the provisions of Article 51.

The persons responsible for these duties must meet the qualification requirements laid down
in Article 49 3 of the same Directive, they shall be permanently and continuously at the
disposal of the holder of the Manufacturing Authorisation to carry out their responsibilities.

The responsibilities of a Qualified Person may be delegated, but only to other Qualified
Person(s).

Guidance on the role of the Qualified Person is elaborated in Annex 16.

2.7 The head of the Production Department generally has the following responsibilities:

      i.   To ensure that products are produced and stored according to the appropriate
           documentation in order to obtain the required quality;
     ii.   To approve the instructions relating to production operations and to ensure their strict
           implementation;
    iii.   To ensure that the production records are evaluated and signed by an authorised
           person;
    iv.    To ensure the qualification and maintenance of his department, premises and
           equipment;
     v.    To ensure that the appropriate validations are done;
    vi.    To ensure that the required initial and continuing training of his department personnel
           is carried out and adapted according to need.

2.8 The head of Quality Control generally has the following responsibilities:

      i.   To approve or reject, as he sees fit, starting materials, packaging materials,
           intermediate, bulk and finished products;
     ii.   To ensure that all necessary testing is carried out and the associated records evaluated;


2
  According to Article 51 paragraph 1 of Directive 2001/83/EC), the batches of medicinal products which have
undergone such controls in a Member State shall be exempt from the controls if they are marketed in another
Member State, accompanied by the control reports signed by the qualified person..
3
  Article 53 of Directive 2001/82/EC
                                                     3
 iii.       To approve specifications, sampling instructions, test methods and other Quality
            Control procedures;
 iv.        To approve and monitor any contract analysts;
  v.        To ensure the qualification and maintenance of his department, premises and
            equipment;
 vi.        To ensure that the appropriate validations are done;
vii.        To ensure that the required initial and continuing training of his department personnel
            is carried out and adapted according to need.

Other duties of Quality Control are summarised in Chapter 6.

2.9 The heads of Production, Quality Control and where relevant, Head of Quality Assurance
or Head of Quality Unit, generally have some shared, or jointly exercised, responsibilities
relating to quality including in particular the design, effective implementation, monitoring and
maintenance of the quality management system. These may include, subject to any national
regulations:

          i.    The authorisation of written procedures and other documents, including
                amendments;
          ii.   The monitoring and control of the manufacturing environment;
        iii.    Plant hygiene;
         iv.    Process validation;
          v.    Training;
         vi.    The approval and monitoring of suppliers of materials;
        vii.    The approval and monitoring of contract manufacturers and providers of other
                GMP related outsourced activities;
    viii.       The designation and monitoring of storage conditions for materials and products;
     ix.        The retention of records;
      x.        The monitoring of compliance with the requirements of Good Manufacturing
                Practice;
         xi.    The inspection, investigation, and taking of samples, in order to monitor factors
                which may affect product quality;
        xii.    Participation in management reviews of process performance, product quality and
                of the quality management system and advocating continual improvement
    xiii.       Ensuring that a timely and effective communication and escalation process exists
                to raise quality issues to the appropriate levels of management.


Training

2.10 The manufacturer should provide training for all the personnel whose duties take them
into production and storage areas or into control laboratories (including the technical,
maintenance and cleaning personnel), and for other personnel whose activities could affect
the quality of the product.

2.11 Besides the basic training on the theory and practice of the quality management system
and Good Manufacturing Practice, newly recruited personnel should receive training
appropriate to the duties assigned to them. Continuing training should also be given, and its
practical effectiveness should be periodically assessed. Training programmes should be
available, approved by either the head of Production or the head of Quality Control, as
appropriate. Training records should be kept.


                                                   4
2.12 Personnel working in areas where contamination is a hazard, e.g. clean areas or areas
where highly active, toxic, infectious or sensitising materials are handled, should be given
specific training.

2.13 Visitors or untrained personnel should, preferably, not be taken into the production and
quality control areas. If this is unavoidable, they should be given information in advance,
particularly about personal hygiene and the prescribed protective clothing. They should be
closely supervised.

2.14 The pharmaceutical quality system and all the measures capable of improving its
understanding and implementation should be fully discussed during the training sessions.

Personnel Hygiene

2.15 Detailed hygiene programmes should be established and adapted to the different needs
within the factory. They should include procedures relating to the health, hygiene practices
and clothing of personnel. These procedures should be understood and followed in a very
strict way by every person whose duties take him into the production and control areas.
Hygiene programmes should be promoted by management and widely discussed during
training sessions.

2.16 All personnel should receive medical examination upon recruitment. It must be the
manufacturer’s responsibility that there are instructions ensuring that health conditions that
can be of relevance to the quality of products come to the manufacturer’s knowledge. After
the first medical examination, examinations should be carried out when necessary for the
work and personal health.

2.17 Steps should be taken to ensure as far as is practicable that no person affected by an
infectious disease or having open lesions on the exposed surface of the body is engaged in the
manufacture of medicinal products.

2.18 Every person entering the manufacturing areas should wear protective garments
appropriate to the operations to be carried out.

2.19 Eating, drinking, chewing or smoking, or the storage of food, drink, smoking materials
or personal medication in the production and storage areas should be prohibited. In general,
any unhygienic practice within the manufacturing areas or in any other area where the product
might be adversely affected should be forbidden.

2.20 Direct contact should be avoided between the operator’s hands and the exposed product
as well as with any part of the equipment that comes into contact with the products.

2.21 Personnel should be instructed to use the hand-washing facilities.

2.22 Any specific requirements for the manufacture of special groups of products, for
example sterile preparations, are covered in the annexes.

Consultants

2.23 Consultants should have adequate education, training, and experience, or any
combination thereof, to advise on the subject for which they are retained.


                                               5
Records should be maintained stating the name, address, qualifications, and type of service
provided by these consultants.




                                             6
