                         EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                         HEALTH AND CONSUMERS DIRECTORATE-GENERAL

                         Health systems and products
                         Medicinal products – quality, safety and efficacy


                                                                             Brussels, 13 August 2014
                                                                                  Ares(2014)2674297

                                                EudraLex



              The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union


                                         Volume 4
                                    EU Guidelines for
                             Good Manufacturing Practice for
                     Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use

                                         Part 1
                Chapter 8: Complaints, Quality Defects and Product Recalls

Legal basis for publishing the detailed guidelines: Article 47 of Directive 2001/83/EC on the
Community code relating to medicinal products for human use and Article 51 of Directive
2001/82/EC on the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products. This document
provides guidance for the interpretation of the principles and guidelines of good manufacturing
practice (GMP) for medicinal products as laid down in Directive 2003/94/EC for medicinal
products for human use and Directive 91/412/EEC for veterinary use.


Status of the document: Revision


Reasons for changes: Extensive changes have been made to this Chapter which now reflect that
Quality Risk Management principles should be applied when investigating quality defects or
complaints and when making decisions in relation to product recalls or other risk-mitigating
actions. It emphasises the need for the cause(s) of quality defects or complaints to be
investigated and determined, and that appropriate preventative actions are put in place to guard
against a recurrence of the issue and clarifies expectations and responsibilities in relation to the
reporting of quality defects to the Competent Authorities.


Deadline for coming into operation: 1 March 2015.




                                                      1
Principle

In order to protect public and animal health, a system and appropriate procedures should be in
place to record, assess, investigate and review complaints including potential quality defects,
and if necessary, to effectively and promptly recall medicinal products for human or veterinary
use and investigational medicinal products from the distribution network. Quality Risk
Management principles should be applied to the investigation and assessment of quality defects
and to the decision-making process in relation to product recalls corrective and preventative
actions and other risk-reducing actions. Guidance in relation to these principles is provided in
Chapter 1.
All concerned competent authorities should be informed in a timely manner in case of a
confirmed quality defect (faulty manufacture, product deterioration, detection of falsification,
non-compliance with the marketing authorisation or product specification file, or any other
serious quality problems) with a medicinal or investigational medicinal product which may
result in the recall of the product or an abnormal restriction in the supply. In situations where
product on the market is found to be non-compliant with the marketing authorisation, there is no
requirement to notify concerned competent authorities provided the degree of non-compliance
satisfies the Annex 16 restrictions regarding the handling of unplanned deviations.
In case of outsourced activities, a contract should describe the role and responsibilities of the
manufacturer, the marketing authorisation holder and/or sponsor and any other relevant third
parties in relation to assessment, decision-making, and dissemination of information and
implementation of risk-reducing actions relating to a defective product. Guidance in relation to
contracts is provided in Chapter 7. Such contracts should also address how to contact those
responsible at each party for the management of quality defect and recall issues.


Personnel and Organisation

8.1   Appropriately trained and experienced personnel should be responsible for managing
      complaint and quality defect investigations and for deciding the measures to be taken to
      manage any potential risk(s) presented by those issues, including recalls. These persons
      should be independent of the sales and marketing organisation, unless otherwise justified.
      If these persons do not include the Qualified Person involved in the certification for
      release of the concerned batch or batches, the latter should be made formally aware of any
      investigations, any risk-reducing actions and any recall operations, in a timely manner.
8.2   Sufficient trained personnel and resources should be made available for the handling,
      assessment, investigation and review of complaints and quality defects and for
      implementing any risk-reducing actions. Sufficient trained personnel and resources should
      also be available for the management of interactions with competent authorities.
8.3   The use of inter-disciplinary teams should be considered, including appropriately trained
      Quality Management personnel.
8.4   In situations in which complaint and quality defect handling is managed centrally within
      an organisation, the relative roles and responsibilities of the concerned parties should be
      documented. Central management should not, however, result in delays in the
      investigation and management of the issue.



                                               2
Procedures for handling and investigating complaints including possible quality defects

8.5     There should be written procedures describing the actions to be taken upon receipt of a
        complaint. All complaints should be documented and assessed to establish if they
        represent a potential quality defect or other issue.
8.6     Special attention should be given to establishing whether a complaint or suspected quality
        defect relates to falsification.
8.7     As not all complaints received by a company may represent actual quality defects,
        complaints which do not indicate a potential quality defect should be documented
        appropriately and communicated to the relevant group or person responsible for the
        investigation and management of complaints of that nature, such as suspected adverse
        events.
8.8     There should be procedures in place to facilitate a request to investigate the quality of a
        batch of a medicinal product in order to support an investigation into a reported suspected
        adverse event.
8.9     When a quality defect investigation is initiated, procedures should be in place to address at
        least the following:
         i.   The description of the reported quality defect.
        ii.   The determination of the extent of the quality defect. The checking or testing of
              reference and/or retention samples should be considered as part of this, and in certain
              cases, a review of the batch production record, the batch certification record and the
              batch distribution records (especially for temperature-sensitive products) should be
              performed.
       iii.   The need to request a sample, or the return, of the defective product from the
              complainant and, where a sample is provided, the need for an appropriate evaluation
              to be carried out.
       iv.    The assessment of the risk(s) posed by the quality defect, based on the severity and
              extent of the quality defect.
        v.    The decision-making process that is to be used concerning the potential need for risk-
              reducing actions to be taken in the distribution network, such as batch or product
              recalls, or other actions.
       vi.    The assessment of the impact that any recall action may have on the availability of
              the medicinal product to patients/animals in any affected market, and the need to
              notify the relevant authorities of such impact.
      vii.    The internal and external communications that should be made in relation to a quality
              defect and its investigation.
      viii.   The identification of the potential root cause(s) of the quality defect.
       ix.    The need for appropriate Corrective and Preventative Actions (CAPAs) to be
              identified and implemented for the issue, and for the assessment of the effectiveness
              of those CAPAs.




                                                    3
Investigation and Decision-making

8.10 The information reported in relation to possible quality defects should be recorded,
     including all the original details. The validity and extent of all reported quality defects
     should be documented and assessed in accordance with Quality Risk Management
     principles in order to support decisions regarding the degree of investigation and action
     taken.
8.11 If a quality defect is discovered or suspected in a batch, consideration should be given to
     checking other batches and in some cases other products, in order to determine whether
     they are also affected. In particular, other batches which may contain portions of the
     defective batch or defective components should be investigated.
8.12 Quality defect investigations should include a review of previous quality defect reports or
     any other relevant information for any indication of specific or recurring problems
     requiring attention and possibly further regulatory action.
8.13 The decisions that are made during and following quality defect investigations should
     reflect the level of risk that is presented by the quality defect as well as the seriousness of
     any non-compliance with respect to the requirements of the marketing
     authorisation/product specification file or GMP. Such decisions should be timely to ensure
     that patient and animal safety is maintained, in a way that is commensurate with the level
     of risk that is presented by those issues.
8.14 As comprehensive information on the nature and extent of the quality defect may not
     always be available at the early stages of an investigation, the decision-making processes
     should still ensure that appropriate risk-reducing actions are taken at an appropriate time-
     point during such investigations. All the decisions and measures taken as a result of a
     quality defect should be documented.
8.15 Quality defects should be reported in a timely manner by the manufacturer to the
     marketing authorisation holder/sponsor and all concerned Competent Authorities in cases
     where the quality defect may result in the recall of the product or in an abnormal
     restriction in the supply of the product.

Root Cause Analysis and Corrective and Preventative Actions

8.16 An appropriate level of root cause analysis work should be applied during the
     investigation of quality defects. In cases where the true root cause(s) of the quality defect
     cannot be determined, consideration should be given to identifying the most likely root
     cause(s) and to addressing those.
8.17 Where human error is suspected or identified as the cause of a quality defect, this should
     be formally justified and care should be exercised so as to ensure that process, procedural
     or system-based errors or problems are not overlooked, if present.
8.18 Appropriate CAPAs should be identified and taken in response to a quality defect. The
     effectiveness of such actions should be monitored and assessed.
8.19 Quality defect records should be reviewed and trend analyses should be performed
     regularly for any indication of specific or recurring problems requiring attention.



                                                 4
Product Recalls and other potential risk-reducing actions

8.20 There should be established written procedures, regularly reviewed and updated when
     necessary, in order to undertake any recall activity or implement any other risk-reducing
     actions.
8.21 After a product has been placed on the market, any retrieval of it from the distribution
     network as a result of a quality defect should be regarded and managed as a recall. (This
     provision does not apply to the retrieval (or return) of samples of the product from the
     distribution network to facilitate an investigation into a quality defect issue/report.)
8.22 Recall operations should be capable of being initiated promptly and at any time. In certain
     cases recall operations may need to be initiated to protect public or animal health prior to
     establishing the root cause(s) and full extent of the quality defect
8.23 The batch/product distribution records should be readily available to the persons
     responsible for recalls, and should contain sufficient information on wholesalers and
     directly supplied customers (with addresses, phone and/or fax numbers inside and outside
     working hours, batches and amounts delivered), including those for exported products and
     medical samples.
8.24 In the case of investigational medicinal products, all trial sites should be identified and the
     countries of destination should be indicated. In the case of an investigational medicinal
     product for which a marketing authorisation has been issued, the manufacturer of the
     investigational medicinal product should, in cooperation with the sponsor, inform the
     marketing authorisation holder of any quality defect that could be related to the authorised
     medicinal product. The sponsor should implement a procedure for the rapid unblinding of
     blinded products, where this is necessary for a prompt recall. The sponsor should ensure
     that the procedure discloses the identity of the blinded product only in so far as is
     necessary.
8.25 Consideration should be given following consultation with the concerned Competent
     Authorities, as to how far into the distribution network a recall action should extend,
     taking into account the potential risk to public or animal health and any impact that the
     proposed recall action may have. The Competent Authorities should also be informed in
     situations in which no recall action is being proposed for a defective batch because the
     batch has expired (such as with short shelf-life products.)
8.26 All concerned Competent Authorities should be informed in advance in cases where
     products are intended to be recalled. For very serious issues (i.e. those with the potential
     to seriously impact upon patient or animal health), rapid risk-reducing actions (such as a
     product recall) may have to be taken in advance of notifying the Competent Authorities.
     Wherever possible, attempts should be made to agree these in advance of their execution
     with the concerned Competent Authorities
8.27 It should also be considered whether the proposed recall action may affect different
     markets in different ways, and if this is the case, appropriate market-specific risk-reducing
     actions should be developed and discussed with the concerned competent authorities.
     Taking account of its therapeutic use the risk of shortage of a medicinal product which has
     no authorised alternative should be considered before deciding on a risk-reducing action
     such as a recall. Any decisions not to execute a risk-reducing action which would
     otherwise be required should be agreed with the competent authority in advance.


                                                 5
8.28 Recalled products should be identified and stored separately in a secure area while
     awaiting a decision on their fate. A formal disposition of all recalled batches should be
     made and documented. The rationale for any decision to rework recalled products should
     be documented and discussed with the relevant competent authority. The extent of shelf-
     life remaining for any reworked batches that are being considered for placement onto the
     market should also be considered.
8.29 The progress of the recall process should be recorded until closure and a final
     report issued, including a reconciliation between the delivered and recovered
     quantities of the concerned products/batches.
8.30 The effectiveness of the arrangements in place for recalls should be periodically evaluated
     to confirm that they remain robust and fit for use. Such evaluations should extend to both
     within office-hour situations as well as out-of-office hour situations and, when performing
     such evaluations, consideration should be given as to whether mock-recall actions should
     be performed. This evaluation should be documented and justified.
8.31 In addition to recalls, there are other potential risk-reducing actions that may be
     considered in order to manage the risks presented by quality defects. Such actions may
     include the issuance of cautionary communications to healthcare professionals in relation
     to their use of a batch that is potentially defective. These should be considered on a case-
     by-case basis and discussed with the concerned competent authorities.




                                               6
