                                                                                             Ref. Ares(2015)283689 - 23/01/2015


CHAPTER 5 PRODUCTION
                                 EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                                 HEALTH AND CONSUMERS DIRECTORATE-GENERAL

                                 Health systems and products
                                 Medicinal products – quality, safety and efficacy




                                                                                        Brussels, 13 August 2014


                                                      EudraLex


                  The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union

                                               Volume 4
                                          EU Guidelines for
                                   Good Manufacturing Practice for
                           Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use

                                                     Part 1
                                              Chapter 5: Production


Legal basis for publishing the detailed guidelines: Article 47 of Directive 2001/83/EC on
the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use and Article 51 of Directive
2001/82/EC on the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products. This document
provides guidance for the interpretation of the principles and guidelines of good
manufacturing practice (GMP) for medicinal products as laid down in Directive 2003/94/EC
for medicinal products for human use and Directive 91/412/EEC for veterinary use.


Status of the document: Revisiona.


Reasons for changes: Changes have been made to sections 17 to 21, including adding a new
section, to improve the guidance on prevention of cross-contamination and to refer to
toxicological assessment. Changes were also introduced in sections 27 to 30, including adding
a new section, on the qualification of suppliers in order to reflect the legal obligation of
manufacturing authorisation holders to ensure that active substances are produced in
accordance with GMP. The changes include supply chain traceability. Sections 35 and 36 are
inserted to clarify and harmonise expectations of manufacturers regarding the testing of
starting materials while section 71 introduces guidance on notification of restrictions in
supply.


Deadline for coming into operation: 1 March 2015. However, the toxicological evaluation
mentioned in section 20 has to be carried out:

a
  In January 2015 the deadline for coming into operation was adapted with regard to the toxicological evaluation
to align with the coming effect of the EMA guideline on setting health based exposure limits for use in risk
identification in the manufacture of different medicinal products in shared facilities. Furthermore, correction of
the reference in footnote 2 took place.
    Commission Européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel – Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11
                                                          1
   from 1 June 2015 onwards for any medicinal product newly introduced into shared
    manufacturing facilities;
   before 1 December 2015 for medicinal products already produced in a shared
    manufacturing facility producing only medicinal products for human use or producing
    both medicinal products for human use and veterinary medicinal products on 31 May
    2015;
   before 1 June 2016 for veterinary medicinal products already produced in a shared
    manufacturing facility producing only veterinary medicinal products on 31 May 2015.




                                         2
Principle
Production operations must follow clearly defined procedures; they must comply with the
principles of Good Manufacturing Practice in order to obtain products of the requisite quality
and be in accordance with the relevant manufacturing and marketing authorisations.

General

5.1   Production should be performed and supervised by competent people.

5.2   All handling of materials and products, such as receipt and quarantine, sampling,
      storage, labelling, dispensing, processing, packaging and distribution should be done in
      accordance with written procedures or instructions and, where necessary, recorded.

5.3   All incoming materials should be checked to ensure that the consignment corresponds
      to the order. Containers should be cleaned where necessary and labelled with the
      prescribed data.

5.4   Damage to containers and any other problem which might adversely affect the quality
      of a material should be investigated, recorded and reported to the Quality Control
      Department.

5.5   Incoming materials and finished products should be physically or administratively
      quarantined immediately after receipt or processing, until they have been released for
      use or distribution.

5.6   Intermediate and bulk products purchased as such should be handled on receipt as
      though they were starting materials.

5.7   All materials and products should be stored under the appropriate conditions established
      by the manufacturer and in an orderly fashion to permit batch segregation and stock
      rotation.

5.8   Checks on yields, and reconciliation of quantities, should be carried out as necessary to
      ensure that there are no discrepancies outside acceptable limits.

5.9   Operations on different products should not be carried out simultaneously or
      consecutively in the same room unless there is no risk of mix-up or cross-
      contamination.

5.10 At every stage of processing, products and materials should be protected from microbial
     and other contamination.

5.11 When working with dry materials and products, special precautions should be taken to
     prevent the generation and dissemination of dust. This applies particularly to the
     handling of highly active or sensitising materials.

5.12 At all times during processing, all materials, bulk containers, major items of equipment
     and where appropriate rooms used should be labelled or otherwise identified with an
     indication of the product or material being processed, its strength (where applicable)
     and batch number. Where applicable, this indication should also mention the stage of
     production.
                                               3
5.13 Labels applied to containers, equipment or premises should be clear, unambiguous and
     in the company’s agreed format. It is often helpful in addition to the wording on the
     labels to use colours to indicate status (for example, quarantined, accepted, rejected,
     clean).

5.14 Checks should be carried out to ensure that pipelines and other pieces of equipment
     used for the transportation of products from one area to another are connected in a
     correct manner.

5.15 Any deviation from instructions or procedures should be avoided as far as possible. If a
     deviation occurs, it should be approved in writing by a competent person, with the
     involvement of the Quality Control department when appropriate.

5.16 Access to production premises should be restricted to authorised personnel.

Prevention of cross-contamination in production

5.17 Normally, the production of non-medicinal products should be avoided in areas and
     with equipment destined for the production of medicinal products but, where justified,
     could be allowed where the measures to prevent cross-contamination with medicinal
     products described below and in Chapter 3 can be applied. The production and/or
     storage of technical poisons, such as pesticides (except where these are used for
     manufacture of medicinal products) and herbicides, should not be allowed in areas used
     for the manufacture and / or storage of medicinal products.

5.18 Contamination of a starting material or of a product by another material or product
     should be prevented. This risk of accidental cross-contamination resulting from the
     uncontrolled release of dust, gases, vapours, aerosols, genetic material or organisms
     from active substances, other starting materials, and products in process, from residues
     on equipment, and from operators’ clothing should be assessed. The significance of this
     risk varies with the nature of the contaminant and that of the product being
     contaminated. Products in which cross-contamination is likely to be most significant
     are those administered by injection and those given over a long time. However,
     contamination of all products poses a risk to patient safety dependent on the nature and
     extent of contamination.
5.19 Cross-contamination should be prevented by attention to design of the premises and
     equipment as described in Chapter 3. This should be supported by attention to process
     design and implementation of any relevant technical or organizational measures,
     including effective and reproducible cleaning processes to control risk of cross-
     contamination.

 5.20 A Quality Risk Management process, which includes a potency and toxicological
     evaluation, should be used to assess and control the cross-contamination risks presented
     by the products manufactured. Factors including; facility/equipment design and use,
     personnel and material flow, microbiological controls, physico-chemical characteristics
     of the active substance, process characteristics, cleaning processes and analytical
     capabilities relative to the relevant limits established from the evaluation of the products
     should also be taken into account. The outcome of the Quality Risk Management
     process should be the basis for determining the necessity for and extent to which
     premises and equipment should be dedicated to a particular product or product family.
     This may include dedicating specific product contact parts or dedication of the entire
     manufacturing facility. It may be acceptable to confine manufacturing activities to a
                                               4
      segregated, self contained production area within a multiproduct facility, where
      justified.

5.21 The outcome of the Quality Risk Management process should be the basis for
     determining the extent of technical and organisational measures required to control risks
     for cross-contamination. These could include, but are not limited to, the following:

      Technical Measures

      i.   Dedicated manufacturing facility (premises and equipment);
     ii.   Self-contained production areas having separate processing equipment and
           separate heating, ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems. It may also be
           desirable to isolate certain utilities from those used in other areas;
    iii.   Design of manufacturing process, premises and equipment to minimize
           opportunities for cross-contamination during processing, maintenance and
           cleaning;
    iv.    Use of “closed systems” for processing and material/product transfer between
           equipment;
     v.    Use of physical barrier systems, including isolators, as containment measures;
    vi.    Controlled removal of dust close to source of the contaminant e.g. through
           localised extraction;
    vii.   Dedication of equipment, dedication of product contact parts or dedication of
           selected parts which are harder to clean (e.g. filters), dedication of maintenance
           tools;
   viii.   Use of single use disposable technologies;
     ix.   Use of equipment designed for ease of cleaning;
     x.    Appropriate use of air-locks and pressure cascade to confine potential airborne
           contaminant within a specified area;
    xi.    Minimising the risk of contamination caused by recirculation or re-entry of
           untreated or insufficiently treated air;
    xii.   Use of automatic clean in place systems of validated effectiveness;
   xiii.   For common general wash areas, separation of equipment washing, drying and
           storage areas.

      Organisational Measures

      i.   Dedicating the whole manufacturing facility or a self contained production area on
           a campaign basis (dedicated by separation in time) followed by a cleaning process
           of validated effectiveness;
     ii.   Keeping specific protective clothing inside areas where products with high risk of
           cross-contamination are processed;
    iii.   Cleaning verification after each product campaign should be considered as a
           detectability tool to support effectiveness of the Quality Risk Management
           approach for products deemed to present higher risk;


                                              5
    iv.    Depending on the contamination risk, verification of cleaning of non product
           contact surfaces and monitoring of air within the manufacturing area and/or
           adjoining areas in order to demonstrate effectiveness of control measures against
           airborne contamination or contamination by mechanical transfer;
     v.    Specific measures for waste handling, contaminated rinsing water and soiled
           gowning;
    vi.    Recording of spills, accidental events or deviations from procedures;
    vii.   Design of cleaning processes for premises and equipment such that the cleaning
           processes in themselves do not present a cross-contamination risk;
   viii.   Design of detailed records for cleaning processes to assure completion of cleaning
           in accordance with approved procedures and use of cleaning status labels on
           equipment and manufacturing areas;
    ix.    Use of common general wash areas on a campaign basis;
     x.    Supervision of working behaviour to ensure training effectiveness and compliance
           with the relevant procedural controls.

5.22 Measures to prevent cross-contamination and their effectiveness should be reviewed
     periodically according to set procedures.

Validation

5.23 Validation studies should reinforce Good Manufacturing Practice and be conducted in
     accordance with defined procedures. Results and conclusions should be recorded.

5.24 When any new manufacturing formula or method of preparation is adopted, steps should
     be taken to demonstrate its suitability for routine processing. The defined process, using
     the materials and equipment specified, should be shown to yield a product consistently
     of the required quality.

5.25 Significant amendments to the manufacturing process, including any change in
     equipment or materials, which may affect product quality and/or the reproducibility of
     the process, should be validated.

5.26 Processes and procedures should undergo periodic critical re-validation to ensure that
     they remain capable of achieving the intended results.

Starting materials

5.27 The selection, qualification, approval and maintenance of suppliers of starting materials,
     together with their purchase and acceptance, should be documented as part of the
     pharmaceutical quality system. The level of supervision should be proportionate to the
     risks posed by the individual materials, taking account of their source, manufacturing
     process, supply chain complexity and the final use to which the material is put in the
     medicinal product. The supporting evidence for each supplier / material approval should
     be maintained. Staff involved in these activities should have a current knowledge of the
     suppliers, the supply chain and the associated risks involved. Where possible, starting
     materials should be purchased directly from the manufacturer of the starting material.


                                               6
5.28 The quality requirements established by the manufacturer for the starting materials
     should be discussed and agreed with the suppliers. Appropriate aspects of the
     production, testing and control, including handling, labelling, packaging and
     distribution requirements, complaints, recalls and rejection procedures should be
     documented in a formal quality agreement or specification.

5.29 For the approval and maintenance of suppliers of active substances and excipients, the
     following is required:

       Active substances1

       Supply chain traceability should be established and the associated risks, from active
       substance starting materials to the finished medicinal product, should be formally
       assessed and periodically verified. Appropriate measures should be put in place to
       reduce risks to the quality of the active substance.

       The supply chain and traceability records for each active substance (including active
       substance starting materials) should be available and be retained by the EEA based
       manufacturer or importer of the medicinal product.

       Audits should be carried out at the manufacturers and distributors of active substances
       to confirm that they comply with the relevant good manufacturing practice and good
       distribution practice requirements. The holder of the manufacturing authorisation shall
       verify such compliance either by himself or through an entity acting on his behalf under
       a contract. For veterinary medicinal products, audits should be conducted based on risk.

       Audits should be of an appropriate duration and scope to ensure that a full and clear
       assessment of GMP is made; consideration should be given to potential cross-
       contamination from other materials on site. The report should fully reflect what was
       done and seen on the audit with any deficiencies clearly identified. Any required
       corrective and preventive actions should be implemented.

       Further audits should be undertaken at intervals defined by the quality risk management
       process to ensure the maintenance of standards and continued use of the approved
       supply chain.

       Excipients

       Excipients and excipient suppliers should be controlled appropriately based on the
       results of a formalised quality risk assessment in accordance with the European
       Commission ‘Guidelines on the formalised risk assessment for ascertaining the
       appropriate Good Manufacturing Practice for excipients of medicinal products for
       human use’.

5.30 For each delivery of starting material the containers should be checked for integrity of
     package, including tamper evident seal where relevant, and for correspondence between
     the delivery note, the purchase order, the supplier’s labels and approved manufacturer
     and supplier information maintained by the medicinal product manufacturer. The
     receiving checks on each delivery should be documented.


1
 Specific requirements apply to the importation of active substances to be used in the manufacture of medicinal
products for human use in article 46b of Directive 2001/83/EC.
                                                       7
5.31 If one material delivery is made up of different batches, each batch must be considered
     as separate for sampling, testing and release.

5.32 Starting materials in the storage area should be appropriately labelled (see section 13).
     Labels should bear at least the following information:

       i.    The designated name of the product and the internal code reference where
             applicable;
      ii.    A batch number given at receipt;
     iii.    Where appropriate, the status of the contents (e.g. in quarantine, on test, released,
             rejected);
      iv.    Where appropriate, an expiry date or a date beyond which retesting is necessary.
       When fully computerised storage systems are used, all the above information need not
       necessarily be in a legible form on the label.

5.33 There should be appropriate procedures or measures to assure the identity of the
     contents of each container of starting material. Bulk containers from which samples
     have been drawn should be identified (see Chapter 6).

5.34 Only starting materials which have been released by the Quality Control department and
     which are within their retest period should be used.

5.35 Manufacturers of finished products are responsible for any testing of starting materials2
     as described in the marketing authorisation dossier. They can utilise partial or full test
     results from the approved starting material manufacturer but must, as a minimum,
     perform identification testing3 of each batch according to Annex 8.

5.36 The rationale for the outsourcing of this testing should be justified and documented and
     the following requirements should be fulfilled:

       i.    Special attention should be paid to the distribution controls (transport,
             wholesaling, storage and delivery) in order to maintain the quality characteristics
             of the starting materials and to ensure that test results remain applicable to the
             delivered material;
      ii.    The medicinal product manufacturer should perform audits, either itself or via
             third parties, at appropriate intervals based on risk at the site(s) carrying out the
             testing (including sampling) of the starting materials in order to assure compliance
             with Good Manufacturing Practice and with the specifications and testing methods
             described in the marketing authorisation dossier;
     iii.    The certificate of analysis provided by the starting material manufacturer/supplier
             should be signed by a designated person with appropriate qualifications and
             experience. The signature assures that each batch has been checked for compliance
             with the agreed product specification unless this assurance is provided separately;

      iv.    The medicinal product manufacturer should have appropriate experience in dealing
             with the starting material manufacturer (including experience via a supplier)

2
  A similar approach should apply to packaging materials as stated in section 5.45.
3
  Identity testing of starting materials should be performed according to the methods and the specifications of the
relevant marketing authorisation dossier.

                                                         8
           including assessment of batches previously received and the history of compliance
           before reducing in-house testing. Any significant change in the manufacturing or
           testing processes should be considered;

     v.    The medicinal product manufacturer should also perform (or via a separately
           approved contract laboratory) a full analysis at appropriate intervals based on risk
           and compare the results with the material manufacturer or supplier’s certificate of
           analysis in order to check the reliability of the latter. Should this testing identify
           any discrepancy then an investigation should be performed and appropriate
           measures taken. The acceptance of certificates of analysis from the material
           manufacturer or supplier should be discontinued until these measures are
           completed.

5.37 Starting materials should only be dispensed by designated persons, following a written
     procedure, to ensure that the correct materials are accurately weighed or measured into
     clean and properly labelled containers.

5.38 Each dispensed material and its weight or volume should be independently checked and
     the check recorded.

5.39 Materials dispensed for each batch should be kept together and conspicuously labelled
     as such.

Processing operations: intermediate and bulk products

5.40 Before any processing operation is started, steps should be taken to ensure that the work
     area and equipment are clean and free from any starting materials, products, product
     residues or documents not required for the current operation.

5.41 Intermediate and bulk products should be kept under appropriate conditions.

5.42 Critical processes should be validated (see "Validation" in this Chapter).

5.43 Any necessary in-process controls and environmental controls should be carried out and
     recorded.

5.44 Any significant deviation from the expected yield should be recorded and investigated.

Packaging materials

5.45 The selection, qualification, approval and maintenance of suppliers of primary and
     printed packaging materials shall be accorded attention similar to that given to starting
     materials.

5.46 Particular attention should be paid to printed materials. They should be stored in
     adequately secure conditions such as to exclude unauthorised access. Cut labels and
     other loose printed materials should be stored and transported in separate closed
     containers so as to avoid mix-ups. Packaging materials should be issued for use only by
     authorised personnel following an approved and documented procedure.




                                               9
5.47 Each delivery or batch of printed or primary packaging material should be given a
     specific reference number or identification mark.

5.48 Outdated or obsolete primary packaging material or printed packaging material should
     be destroyed and this disposal recorded.

Packaging operations

5.49 When setting up a programme for the packaging operations, particular attention should
     be given to minimising the risk of cross-contamination, mix-ups or substitutions.
     Different products should not be packaged in close proximity unless there is physical
     segregation.

5.50 Before packaging operations are begun, steps should be taken to ensure that the work
     area, packaging lines, printing machines and other equipment are clean and free from
     any products, materials or documents previously used, if these are not required for the
     current operation. The line-clearance should be performed according to an appropriate
     check-list.

5.51 The name and batch number of the product being handled should be displayed at each
     packaging station or line.

5.52 All products and packaging materials to be used should be checked on delivery to the
     packaging department for quantity, identity and conformity with the Packaging
     Instructions.

5.53 Containers for filling should be clean before filling. Attention should be given to avoid
     and remove any contaminants such as glass fragments and metal particles.

5.54 Normally, filling and sealing should be followed as quickly as possible by labelling. If it
     is not the case, appropriate procedures should be applied to ensure that no mix-ups or
     mislabelling can occur.

5.55 The correct performance of any printing operation (for example code numbers, expiry
     dates) to be done separately or in the course of the packaging should be checked and
     recorded. Attention should be paid to printing by hand which should be re-checked at
     regular intervals.

5.56 Special care should be taken when using cut-labels and when over-printing is carried
     out off-line. Roll-feed labels are normally preferable to cut-labels, in helping to avoid
     mix-ups.

5.57 Checks should be made to ensure that any electronic code readers, label counters or
     similar devices are operating correctly.

5.58 Printed and embossed information on packaging materials should be distinct and
     resistant to fading or erasing.

5.59 On-line control of the product during packaging should include at least checking the
     following:

      i.   General appearance of the packages;
     ii.   Whether the packages are complete;
                                               10
     iii.   Whether the correct products and packaging materials are used;
     iv.    Whether any over-printing is correct;
      v.    Correct functioning of line monitors.
      Samples taken away from the packaging line should not be returned.

5.60 Products which have been involved in an unusual event should only be reintroduced
     into the process after special inspection, investigation and approval by authorised
     personnel. Detailed record should be kept of this operation.

5.61 Any significant or unusual discrepancy observed during reconciliation of the amount of
     bulk product and printed packaging materials and the number of units produced should
     be investigated and satisfactorily accounted for before release.

5.62 Upon completion of a packaging operation, any unused batch-coded packaging
     materials should be destroyed and the destruction recorded. A documented procedure
     should be followed if un-coded printed materials are returned to stock.

Finished products

5.63 Finished products should be held in quarantine until their final release under conditions
     established by the manufacturer.

5.64 The evaluation of finished products and documentation which is necessary before
     release of product for sale is described in Chapter 6 (Quality Control).

5.65 After release, finished products should be stored as usable stock under conditions
     established by the manufacturer.

Rejected, recovered and returned materials

5.66 Rejected materials and products should be clearly marked as such and stored separately
     in restricted areas. They should either be returned to the suppliers or, where appropriate,
     reprocessed or destroyed. Whatever action is taken should be approved and recorded by
     authorised personnel.

5.67 The reprocessing of rejected products should be exceptional. It is only permitted if the
     quality of the final product is not affected, if the specifications are met and if it is done
     in accordance with a defined and authorised procedure after evaluation of the risks
     involved. Record should be kept of the reprocessing.

5.68 The recovery of all or part of earlier batches which conform to the required quality by
     incorporation into a batch of the same product at a defined stage of manufacture should
     be authorised beforehand. This recovery should be carried out in accordance with a
     defined procedure after evaluation of the risks involved, including any possible effect
     on shelf life. The recovery should be recorded.

5.69 The need for additional testing of any finished product which has been reprocessed, or
     into which a recovered product has been incorporated, should be considered by the
     Quality Control Department.


                                                11
5.70 Products returned from the market and which have left the control of the manufacturer
     should be destroyed unless without doubt their quality is satisfactory; they may be
     considered for re-sale, re-labelling or recovery in a subsequent batch only after they
     have been critically assessed by the Quality Control Department in accordance with a
     written procedure. The nature of the product, any special storage conditions it requires,
     its condition and history, and the time elapsed since it was issued should all be taken
     into account in this assessment. Where any doubt arises over the quality of the product,
     it should not be considered suitable for re-issue or re-use, although basic chemical
     reprocessing to recover active ingredient may be possible. Any action taken should be
     appropriately recorded.

Product shortage due to manufacturing constraints

5.71 The manufacturer should report to the marketing authorisation holder (MAH) any
     constraints in manufacturing operations which may result in abnormal restriction in the
     supply. This should be done in a timely manner to facilitate reporting of the restriction
     in supply by the MAH, to the relevant competent authorities, in accordance with its
     legal obligations4.




4
    Articles 23a and 81 of Directive 2001/83/EC
                                                  12
