                                                                                          Ref. Ares(2015)283695 - 23/01/2015


PT CHAPTER 5 PRODUCTION
                               EUROPEAN COMMISSION
                               HEALTH AND CONSUMERS DIRECTORATE-GENERAL

                               Health systems and products
                               Medicinal products – quality, safety and efficacy




                                                                                      Brussels, 13 August 2014
                                                    EudraLex

               The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union
                                        Volume 4

                                       EU Guidelines for
                                Good Manufacturing Practice for
                        Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use

                                                Part 1
                                  Chapter 3: Premises and Equipment


Legal basis for publishing the detailed guidelines: Article 47 of Directive 2001/83/EC on
the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use and Article 51 of Directive
2001/82/EC on the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products. This document
provides guidance for the interpretation of the principles and guidelines of good
manufacturing practice (GMP) for medicinal products as laid down in Directive 2003/94/EC
for medicinal products for human use and Directive 91/412/EEC for veterinary use.


Status of the document: Revisiona.


Reasons for changes: The only change is to section 6 as part of the improved guidance on
prevention of cross-contamination involving also Chapter 5.


Deadline for coming into operation: 1 March 2015. However, the toxicological evaluation
mentioned in section 6 is to be carried out:


        from 1 June 2015 onwards for any medicinal product newly introduced into shared
         manufacturing facilities;
        before 1 December 2015 for medicinal products already produced in a shared
         manufacturing facility producing only medicinal products for human use or both
         producing medicinal products for human use and veterinary medicinal products on 31
         May 2015;
        before 1 June 2016 for veterinary medicinal products already produced in a shared
         manufacturing facility producing only veterinary medicinal products on 31 May 2015.


a
  In January 2015 the deadline for coming into operation was adapted with regard to the toxicological evaluation
to align with the coming effect of the EMA guideline on setting health based exposure limits for use in risk
identification in the manufacture of different medicinal products in shared facilities.
Commission Européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel – Belgium. Telephone: (32-2) 299 11 11
ER 3 PREMISES AND EQUIPMENT
PRINCIPLE
Premises and equipment must be located, designed, constructed, adapted and maintained to
suit the operations to be carried out. Their layout and design must aim to minimise the risk of
errors and permit effective cleaning and maintenance in order to avoid cross-contamination,
build-up of dust or dirt and, in general, any adverse effect on the quality of products.

PREMISES

General

3.1    Premises should be situated in an environment which, when considered together with
       measures to protect the manufacture, presents minimal risk of causing contamination of
       materials or products.

3.2    Premises should be carefully maintained, ensuring that repair and maintenance
       operations do not present any hazard to the quality of products. They should be cleaned
       and, where applicable, disinfected according to detailed written procedures.

3.3    Lighting, temperature, humidity and ventilation should be appropriate and such that
       they do not adversely affect, directly or indirectly, either the medicinal products during
       their manufacture and storage, or the accurate functioning of equipment.

3.4    Premises should be designed and equipped so as to afford maximum protection against
       the entry of insects or other animals.

3.5    Steps should be taken in order to prevent the entry of unauthorised people. Production,
       storage and quality control areas should not be used as a right of way by personnel who
       do not work in them.

Production Area

3.6    Cross-contamination should be prevented for all products by appropriate design and
       operation of manufacturing facilities. The measures to prevent cross-contamination
       should be commensurate with the risks. Quality Risk Management principles should be
       used to assess and control the risks.
       Depending of the level of risk, it may be necessary to dedicate premises and equipment
       for manufacturing and/or packaging operations to control the risk presented by some
       medicinal products.

       Dedicated facilities are required for manufacturing when a medicinal product presents a
       risk because:

        i.   the risk cannot be adequately controlled by operational and/ or technical measures,
       ii.   scientific data from the toxicological evaluation does not support a controllable
             risk (e.g. allergenic potential from highly sensitising materials such as beta
             lactams) or
      iii.   relevant residue limits, derived from the toxicological evaluation, cannot be
             satisfactorily determined by a validated analytical method.


                                                2
      Further guidance can be found in Chapter 5 and in Annexes 2, 3, 4, 5 & 6.

3.7   Premises should preferably be laid out in such a way as to allow the production to take
      place in areas connected in a logical order corresponding to the sequence of the
      operations and to the requisite cleanliness levels.

3.8   The adequacy of the working and in-process storage space should permit the orderly
      and logical positioning of equipment and materials so as to minimise the risk of
      confusion between different medicinal products or their components, to avoid cross-
      contamination and to minimise the risk of omission or wrong application of any of the
      manufacturing or control steps.

3.9   Where starting and primary packaging materials, intermediate or bulk products are
      exposed to the environment, interior surfaces (walls, floors and ceilings) should be
      smooth, free from cracks and open joints, and should not shed particulate matter and
      should permit easy and effective cleaning and, if necessary, disinfection.

3.10 Pipework, light fittings, ventilation points and other services should be designed and
     sited to avoid the creation of recesses which are difficult to clean. As far as possible,
     for maintenance purposes, they should be accessible from outside the manufacturing
     areas.

3.11 Drains should be of adequate size, and have trapped gullies. Open channels should be
     avoided where possible, but if necessary, they should be shallow to facilitate cleaning
     and disinfection.

3.12 Production areas should be effectively ventilated, with air control facilities (including
     temperature and, where necessary, humidity and filtration) appropriate both to the
     products handled, to the operations undertaken within them and to the external
     environment.

3.13 Weighing of starting materials usually should be carried out in a separate weighing
     room designed for such use.

3.14 In cases where dust is generated (e.g. during sampling, weighing, mixing and
     processing operations, packaging of dry products), specific provisions should be taken
     to avoid cross-contamination and facilitate cleaning.

3.15 Premises for the packaging of medicinal products should be specifically designed and
     laid out so as to avoid mix-ups or cross-contamination.

3.16 Production areas should be well lit, particularly where visual on-line controls are carried
     out.

3.17 In-process controls may be carried out within the production area provided they do not
     carry any risk to production.

Storage Areas

3.18 Storage areas should be of sufficient capacity to allow orderly storage of the various
     categories of materials and products: starting and packaging materials, intermediate,
     bulk and finished products, products in quarantine, released, rejected, returned or
     recalled.
                                               3
3.19 Storage areas should be designed or adapted to ensure good storage conditions. In
     particular, they should be clean and dry and maintained within acceptable temperature
     limits. Where special storage conditions are required (e.g. temperature, humidity) these
     should be provided, checked and monitored.

3.20 Receiving and dispatch bays should protect materials and products from the weather.
     Reception areas should be designed and equipped to allow containers of incoming
     materials to be cleaned where necessary before storage.

3.21 Where quarantine status is ensured by storage in separate areas, these areas must be
     clearly marked and their access restricted to authorised personnel. Any system replacing
     the physical quarantine should give equivalent security.

3.22 There should normally be a separate sampling area for starting materials. If sampling is
     performed in the storage area, it should be conducted in such a way as to prevent
     contamination or cross-contamination.

3.23 Segregated areas should be provided for the storage of rejected, recalled or returned
     materials or products.

3.24 Highly active materials or products should be stored in safe and secure areas.

3.25 Printed packaging materials are considered critical to the conformity of the medicinal
     product and special attention should be paid to the safe and secure storage of these
     materials.

Quality Control Areas

3.26 Normally, Quality Control laboratories should be separated from production areas. This
     is particularly important for laboratories for the control of biologicals, microbiologicals
     and radioisotopes, which should also be separated from each other.

3.27 Control laboratories should be designed to suit the operations to be carried out in them.
     Sufficient space should be given to avoid mix-ups and cross-contamination. There
     should be adequate suitable storage space for samples and records.

3.28 Separate rooms may be necessary to protect sensitive instruments from vibration,
     electrical interference, humidity, etc.

3.29 Special requirements are needed in laboratories handling particular substances, such as
     biological or radioactive samples.

Ancillary Areas

3.30 Rest and refreshment rooms should be separate from other areas.

3.31 Facilities for changing clothes and for washing and toilet purposes should be easily
     accessible and appropriate for the number of users. Toilets should not directly
     communicate with production or storage areas.

3.32 Maintenance workshops should as far as possible be separated from production areas.
     Whenever parts and tools are stored in the production area, they should be kept in
     rooms or lockers reserved for that use.
                                               4
3.33 Animal houses should be well isolated from other areas, with separate entrance (animal
     access) and air handling facilities.

EQUIPMENT

3.34 Manufacturing equipment should be designed, located and maintained to suit its
     intended purpose.

3.35 Repair and maintenance operations should not present any hazard to the quality of the
     products.

3.36 Manufacturing equipment should be designed so that it can be easily and thoroughly
     cleaned. It should be cleaned according to detailed and written procedures and stored
     only in a clean and dry condition.

3.37 Washing and cleaning equipment should be chosen and used in order not to be a source
     of contamination.

3.38 Equipment should be installed in such a way as to prevent any risk of error or of
     contamination.

3.39 Production equipment should not present any hazard to products. Parts of production
     equipment that come into contact with the product must not be reactive, additive or
     absorptive to such an extent that it will affect the quality of the product and thus present
     any hazard.

3.40 Balances and measuring equipment of an appropriate range and precision should be
     available for production and control operations.

3.41 Measuring, weighing, recording and control equipment should be calibrated and
     checked at defined intervals by appropriate methods. Adequate records of such tests
     should be maintained.

3.42 Fixed pipework should be clearly labelled to indicate the contents and, where
     applicable, the direction of flow.

3.43 Distilled, deionised and, where appropriate, other water pipes should be sanitised
     according to written procedures that detail the action limits for microbiological
     contamination and the measures to be taken.

3.44 Defective equipment should, if possible, be removed from production and quality
     control areas, or at least be clearly labelled as defective.




                                                5
